See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/314365666
Farmer´s Compost Handbook
Book · January 2015
CITATIONS
READS
0
1,919
1 author:
Maria Mercedes Martinez
Universidad Técnica Federico Santa María
65 PUBLICATIONS 571 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:
FONDECYT 1130975 View project
All content following this page was uploaded by Maria Mercedes Martinez on 03 January 2019.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

1
FARMER´S
COMPOST
HANDBOOK
Experiences in Latin America
2
FARMER´S
COMPOST
HANDBOOK
Experiences in Latin America
Authors
Pilar Román
María M. Martínez
Alberto Pantoja
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean
Santiago, 2015
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product
do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) concerning the legal
or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or
concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. The mention of specific
companies or products of manufacturers, whether or not these have been patented,
does not imply that these have been endorsed or recommended by FAO in preference
to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned.
The views expressed in this information product are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views or policies of FAO.
ISBN 978-92-5-107844-0 (print)
E-ISBN 978-92-5-107845-7 (PDF)
© FAO, 2015
FAO encourages the use, reproduction and dissemination of material in this information
product. Except where otherwise indicated, material may be copied, downloaded and
printed for private study, research and teaching purposes, or for use in non-commercial
products or services, provided that appropriate acknowledgement of FAO as the source
and copyright holder is given and that FAO’s endorsement of users’ views, products or
services is not implied in any way.
All requests for translation and adaptation rights, and for resale and other commercial
use rights should be made via www.fao.org/contact-us/licence-request or addressed to
copyright@fao.org.
FAO information products are available on the FAO website (www.fao.org/publications)
and can be purchased through publications-sales@fao.org.

Table of contents
1.
2.
3.

Role of FAO in soil preservation
Importance of organic matter in the soil
Theoretical foundations of composting
3.1
Composting process
3.2
Composting phases
3.3
Monitoring during composting
3.4
Hygienization and safety
3.5
Composting material
3.6
Fertilization
3.7
Compost application
3.8
Costs 										
4.
Practical foundations of composting
4.1
Recommended tools
4.2
Composting techniques
4.3
Open air composting
		
4.3.1
Tasks to be performed to build and manage a compost pile
		
4.3.2
Experiences of compost piles in latin america
4.4 Composting in containers
		
4.4.1
Tasks to be performed when composting in containers
4.5 Decision tree
									
5.
Compost-related products
5.1 Vermicompost
5.2 Compost tea
6.
Experiences in Latin America
6.1 Compost production from pig breeding 			
6.2 Compost pile in peri-urban farming
6.3 Compost piles withouth turning
6.4 Horizontal metal compost barrel in urban farming
6.5 Horizontal plastic compost drum in family farming
6.6 Compost production from lettuce waste
7.
Annex
7.1 Conversion factors
7.2 Field analysis of the need of fertilizers					
7.3 Analysis of compost safety
7.4 Vermicompost
7.5 Benefits of compost tea
8.
Bibliographic references 								
1
5
9
10
11
13
20
21
22
30
31
33
34
35
35
40
47
48
52
53
55
56
60
65
66
71
72
75
77
79
81
82
82
83
85
85
87
III
List of figures
Figure 1 Map of risks associated to production areas
Figure 2 Schematic of the evolution of organic matter in the soil
Figure 3 Fungus indicating mesophilic phase II
Figure 4 Temperature, oxygen and pH during composting process
Figure 5 Common compost systems
Figure 6 Dimensions of a small farmer compost pile
Figure 7 Average composición of plants
Figure 8 Preparation of the substrate
Figure 9 Recommended tools
Figure 10 Compost piles. Ciudad Sandino. Nicaragua.
Figure 11 Forced aeration system
Figure 12 Leaching collection system
Figure 13 Mechanized turning
Figure 14 Compost pile
Figure 15 Available composting area
Figure 16 Calculator of C:N ratio
Figure 17 Turning modalities according to the number of piles
Figure 18 Process control spreadsheet
Figure 19 Screen used in the sieving process
Figure 20 Alternative sieving instruments
Figure 21 Composting monitoring spreadsheet
Figure 22 Compost pile cover to avoid temperature drop and excess rain. Nicaragua
Figure 23 Photograph and schematic of the air cushion technique
Figure 24 Photograph and schematic of the ventilating stack technique
Figure 25 Types of containers for compostings
Figure 26 Turning a horizontal compost bin
Figure 27 Vertical or continuous compost container
Figure 28 Horizontal or discontinuous compost drum
Figure 29 California red earthworm cocoon
Figure 30 Earthworm life cycle
Figure 31 Vermicompost container in a school orchard.Tegucigalpa (Honduras)
Figure 32 Vermicompost container in a family orchard. Managua (Nicaragua)
Figure 33 Vermicompost container in peri-urban farming. Asunción (Paraguay)
Figure 34 Vermicompost in family farming. Neiva (Colombia)
Figure 35 Vermicompost drying area
Figure 36 Fresh compost leachate. Vegetable compost. Funza, Colombia
IV
3
6
12
13
18
19
23
30
34
35
36
36
37
38
39
42
43
44
45
46
46
47
47
48
49
49
50
51
56
57
58
58
58
58
60
61
Figure 37 Tank to obtain compost tea
Figure 38 Pig fattening in deep litter. Monte Heliconia Farm
Figure 39 Preparing the litter with rice husk
Figure 40 Pigs rooting the litter
Figure 41 Litter collection and building the compost pile
Figure 42 Periodical turning of the compost pile
Figure 43 Watering the compost pile
Figure 44 Packaging final product								
Figure 45 Compost in bioengineering. Colombia 						
Figure 46 Cleaning the pile area
Figure 47 Segregated material to build the pile
Figure 48 Thick branches forming an air cushion
Figure 49 Interspersed layers of material rich in carbon and nitrogen
Figure 50 Schematic of pile without turningn
Figure 51 Horizontal metal compost barrel
Figure 52 Preparation of the compost drum with material of local farmers
Figure 53 Fertilization of lettuce with compost
Figure 54 Fresh material to compost
Figure 55 Temperatures recorded during the process
62
66
67
67
68
68
69
70
70
71
72
72
73
74
75
77
79
80
80
V
List of tables
Table 1
Table 2
Table 3
Table 4
Table 5
Table 6
Table 7
Table 8
Table 9
Table 10
Table 11
Table 12
Table 13
Table 14
Table 15
Table 16
Table 17
Table 18
Table 19
Table 20
Table 21
Table 22
VI
Aeration control
Optimal moisture parameters
Optimal temperature parameters
Optimal pH parameters
Carbon/Nitrogen parameters
Particle size control
Compost parameters
Temperature required to eliminate most pathogens
Average nutrients content in compost
Extraction of nutrients per crop 							
Fertilizers most commonly used
Conversion among P2O5, K2O, y P, K
Fertilizer cost
Economic balance of a compost plant
C:N ratio of some materials used in composting
Advantages and disadvantages of closed composting systems
Environmental conditions
Material to compost in barrel
Material of the compost container
Symptoms of plant deficiency
Microbiological limits according to different standards
Chemical properties of vermicompost
14
15
16
17
17
18
19
21
24
25
26
26
28
31
41
51
59
76
78
82
84
85
List of examples
Example 1
Calculation of N, P and K 						
27
Example 2
Economic comparison of fertilizers 					
28
Example 3
Calculation of fertilization requirements of a crop 				
29
Example 4
Calculation of the compost pile dimensions according to 		
37
the amount of material to compost 				
Example 5
Calculation of the compost pile dimensions according to 			
38
final compost requirements
Example 6
Calculation of the compost pile dimensions according to 		
39
the available area
Example 7
Calculation of the C: N ratio in the mix of various materials 		
42
Example 8
Calculation of the appropriate volume of the compost container 		
52
Example 9
Choice of a composting method in family farming 			
53
VII
Contributors
FAO
Jan Van Wambeke, Land and Water Senior Officer at FAO Regional Office for Latin
America & the Caribbean.
Alberto Pantoja, Crop Production and Protection Officer at FAO Regional Office for
Latin America & the Caribbean.
Pilar Román, Associated Professional Officer of Climate Change and Environmental
Sustainability at FAO Regional Office for Latin America & the Caribbean.
Benjamin Kiersch, Land Tenure Officer at FAO Regional Office for Latin America &
the Caribbean
Meliza Gonzalez, Consultant on Agroclimatic Risk Management, at FAO Regional
Office for Latin America & the Caribbean
Loreni Cárdenas, Teófilo Avellaneda, Humberto Rodriguez, consultants at FAO
country office in Colombia
Claudio Villasanti , Jorge Gattini, consultants at FAO country office in Paraguay
OTHER INSTITUTIONS
M. Mercedes Martínez, Researcher, Centro Avanzado de Tecnologias para la
Agricultura CATA, Universidad Federico Santa Maria. Santiago, Chile
Ana Karina Carrascal, Food Microbiology Laboratory. Pontificia Universidad
Javeriana. Bogotá, Colombia
Rodrigo Ortega Blu, Centro Avanzado de Tecnologias para la Agricultura CATA,
Universidad Federico Santa Maria. Santiago, Chile
Daniel Enrique Borda-Molina, Researcher, School of Sciences, Pontificia
Universidad Javeriana, Bogotá
Juan Manuel Pardo-Garcia, Resarcher, International Centre for Tropical Agriculture,
CIAT.
Jairo Cuervo, Horticola de Hoy, Colombia
Eduardo Murillo, Karla Loaisiga – INTA-FAO Nicaragua
M.Auxiliadora Martínez – Municipality of Ciudad Sandino, Managua. Nicaragua
VIII
Preface
This “Farmer´s Composting Handbook” is a learning guide about the production of
compost at household and small farmer level, prepared by the FAO Regional Office
for Latin America and the Caribbean, in collaboration with the Research Group on
Soil, Water, Crop and Microorganisms of Universidad Técnica Federico Santa María.
The aim of this paper is to disseminate suitable technologies to develop a healthy
and safe product for use as fertilizer in family orchards. The manual presents the
vision of FAO regarding agriculture: Sustainable Intensification of Agricultural Production, with higher production in the same land surface while conserving resources,
reducing negative impact on the environment and enhancing the natural capital and
the provision of ecosystem services.
This publication is divided in four thematic blocks:
-
Theoretical Foundations of Composting
-
Practical Foundations of Composting
-
Related compost products
-
Experiences in Latin America and the Caribbean.

The section “Theoretical Foundations of Composting” details important parameters
to be measured to determine the quality and safety of the finished material and outlines the benefits of compost in its different uses.
The section of “Practical Foundations of Composting” presents practical examples
that allow the reader to understand how a composting system is implemented in the
field.
The section “Related Compost Products” includes the production and use of compost
tea and vermicompost. The first one contains soluble products of compost or organic
materials used and the second, is obtained from a process with earthworms that use
compost as food.
Finally, the chapter on “Experiences in Latin America and the Caribbean” includes
examples of production or use of compost compiled in different countries of Latin
America, that guide the reader to adjust his own process or verify field use.
The approach in this Manual is the conservation and improvement of the agricultural soil health. A healthy soil maintains a diverse community of organisms that help
controlling crop diseases, insects and weeds, form beneficial symbiotic associations
with plant roots, recycle essential plant nutrients, improves soil structure with positive
effects on the capacity of the soil to retain water and nutrients and, ultimately, improve agricultural production.

IX
Glossary (FAOTERM1)
Fertilization: The act or process of rendering land fertile, fruitful, or productive; the
application of fertilizer, either synthetic or natural
Organic manure: Organic manure covers manures made from cattle dung, rural and
urban composts, and other animal and crop wastes. Efficacy of organic manure for improving
the fertility and productivity of soils has been demonstrated.
Aerobic: A process where gaseous oxygen is present. A successful composting requires
enough oxygen to keep the aerobic process.
Anaerobic: A process where gaseous oxygen is not present. If this occurs during the
composting process, it slows down and can release malodours as a result of decay processes.
Mesophilic microorganisms: Group of bacteria and fungi (yeast or filamentous fungi)
that can live, grow and multiply during composting in the temperature range 30-40 °C.
Thermophilic bacteria: Group of bacteria that can live, grow and multiply during
composting in the temperature range 40°-70°C.
CDC: Demonstration Training Centres.
Mature compost: Compost that has finished all the phases in the composting process.
Immature compost: Compost that has not finished the thermophilic phase in the
composting process.
Decomposition: Organic matter degradation.
Manure: Organic matter that is used to fertilize land, usually consisting of the faeces and
urine of domestic animals. It can be mixed with straw, hay, or bedding. Although manure is
rich in nitrogen, phosphorus and potash, compared to synthetic fertilizers the content is lower
and found in organic form. It may be applied in much greater quantities, to provide the soil
with the quantity needed by the crop, but in general, it is longer available in the soil. It is rich
in organic matter and thus increases soil fertility and improves the capacity of soil to absorb
and retain water.
Humus: Decomposed, dark brown and amorphous organic matter of soils, having lost all
trace of the structure and composition of the vegetable and animal matter from which it was
derived. Humus hence refers to any organic matter that has reached a point of stability and
which is used in agriculture to amend soil. The product from the earthworm is wrongly named
Humus instead of vermicompost.
Humification: The formation of humic and fulvic acids, from mineralized organic matter.
Inoculant: Concentrate of microorganisms that applied to compost, accelerate the
composting process. Immature compost can serve as inoculant.
Inorganic: Mineral substance.
Nitrogen: Indispensable element for plants that can be in organic (proteins and organic
compounds), or inorganic form (nitrate NO-3 or ammonium: NH+4)
Nitrate: Inorganic form of nitrogen. It is oxidized and soluble in soil solution. It is easily lost
through leaching.
1http://www.fao.org/termportal/thematic-glossaries/en/
X
Ammonium: Inorganic form of nitrogen. It is reduced and soluble in soil solution. It is easily
lost through volatilization.
Nitrate leaching: As water comes into contact with nitrogen fertilizer or animal manure,
nitrates and other soluble components in the manure may be dissolved into the water. The water
may then carry these soluble constituents along with it as it infiltrates into the soil and moves
down into the groundwater. Soils that have high water tables and rapid water percolation rates
are more likely to allow contaminated water to reach the groundwater.
Macroorganisms: Live organisms that can be easily seen to the naked eye (spiders,
earthworms, rodents, ants, beetles….). It is also called mesofauna.
Organic matter: Plant and animal wastes and microorganisms at various phases of
decomposition, cells and tissues of soil organisms, and substances synthesized by the soil
population.
Microorganisms: Microscopic living organisms (fungi, including yeast, bacteria actinomycetes,
protozoan, nematodes, etc…).
Mineralization: The conversion of organic compounds by the action of aerobic
microorganisms and the release of inorganic forms essential for plant development.
Organic compound: A substance that contains carbon and hydrogen and usually other
elements such as nitrogen, sulphur and oxygen. Organic compounds can be found in nature
or they can be synthesized in the laboratory. An organic substance is not the same as a natural
substance. A natural material means that it is essentially the same as it was found in nature, but
organic means that it is carbon based.
Pathogen: Microorganism causing disease. It can be phytopathogen when causing disease
in plants, or human or animal pathogen.
Nutrient recycling: Biogeochemical cycle, in which inorganic nutrients move through the
soil, living organisms, air and water. In agriculture, it refers to the return of nutrients absorbed
by plants from the soil, back to the soil. Nutrient cycling can take place through leaf fall, root
exudation (secretion), residue recycling, incorporation of green manures, etc.
C: N ratio: Carbon - Nitrogen ratio.

XI
Executive Summary
During the XXXIII FAO Regional Conference for Latin America and the Caribbean
(Santiago de Chile, May 2014), Member States reaffirmed the need to promote
the development of more inclusive and efficient agricultural / food systems at
international, national and local level. Moreover, the United Nations General
Assembly has declared 2015 as the International Year of Soils, to raise awareness
of the importance of this resource. These, regional and global frameworks reinforce
the work that FAO undertakes to support the development of family farming as one
of the pillars of food security and nutrition in the region.
Fertile soils are a challenge to the world, and Latin America and the Caribbean is no
exception. In this region, countries have increased their agricultural, fishery and forestry
production at above world average rate, but must face, among others, problems
of deforestation, water pollution, loss of biodiversity, degradation and depletion
of soils. These factors threat social, economic and environmental sustainability of
food systems producers. 14% of South American soils, and 26% in Mesoamerica,
suffer from some degree of degradation, affecting, directly or indirectly, agriculture
livelihoods. Soils are one of the most important components for agrifood systems, but
also one of the most fragile: the formation of a centimeter of land requires hundreds
of years of work, and can be destroyed in seconds. Therefore, we must encourage
conservation practices and the adoption of technologies to restore degraded land
and protect those that are still functional.
Composting reduces pollution, reuses organic waste, reduces the cost of fertilizers
and agricultural production inputs and especially returns to soil the nutrients taken
to produce food. This publication provides examples of technologies for farmers to
produce organic fertilizer for their crops. It also includes examples of composting
experiences in the region, and techniques to determine its quality and safety
parameters. This handbook is intended for extensionists and community leaders,
who provide support for the education on agriculture.
“Healthy Soils for a healthy life” is the motto of the International Year of Soils 2015
held in the framework of the Global Soil Partnership, since healthy soils are the
foundation of a healthy environment, a productive food system and an improved
rural livelihood.

Ronald Vargas
FAO, Secretary of the Global Soil Partnership
Meliza Gonzalez
FAO Focal Point for the South American Soil Partnership
XII
1. Role of FAO in
soil preservation
©FAO/Pilar Roman
1
1. Role of FAO in soil
preservation
The basis of all sustainable agricultural system is a fertile
and healthy soil. The edaphic and water resources are
At present, agriculture uses 11% of the land surface for
crop production and the growth rate in cropping area over
the last 50 years has been 12%. Agricultural production
has grown between 2.5 and 3 times during the same
period. This strong growth is due to a significant increase
in the yield of major crops. However, global production
gains in some regions have caused land degradation,
reduction of water resources and the deterioration of ecosystem services (SOLAW,
2011).
Soil ecosystem services include carbon storage, storage and supply of water,
biodiversity and social and cultural services. Improving soil carbon content is a
long term process, which also decreases the rate of erosion, and increases carbon
sequestration to mitigate climate change. At country level, it is desirable to have a
policy based on long-term commitment to maintain or increase the organic matter
content. This vision of protecting the edaphic resource gave origin to the Global
Soil Partnership in 2011.
FAO launched, with the support of the European Commission, the Global Soil
Partnership (GSP) in September 2011. This partnership is an intergovernmental
mechanism. Its aim is to educate decision makers about the important role of
edaphic resources in achieving food security, adaptation to the effects of climate
change and sustainable provision of environmental services. Its purpose is to
promote soil protection and sustainable management.
In the study performed by FAO on The State of the World’s Land and Water
Resources (SOLAW, 2011) it is made clear that, globally, farm production systems
are highly vulnerable due to the combination of excessive demographic pressure
and unsustainable production practices. The global figures on the rate of use
and degradation of land and water resources hide large regional differences in
availability. It is anticipated that the scarcity of land and water, will jeopardise
the capacity of the main farming systems to meet the demand for food and food
security (Figure 1). These physical constraints may get worse in different places due
to external factors, including climate change, competition with other sectors and
socio-economic changes.
The map in Figure 1 shows the main risks associated with large areas of food
production. It is noted that in Latin America there are serious problems associated
2
with the edaphic resource, such as risks of deforestation in Central America and
the Southern Cone, erosion on the Pacific coast, low soil fertility in the Caribbean
and to the interior of the Southern Cone, and loss of biodiversity in Latin America
as a whole.

Figure 1 Map of risks associated to production areas
Source:www.fao.org/nr/solaw
3
FAO promotes agricultural practices and policies to protect natural resources for
future generations. Unsustainable management practices can also cause degradation
(e.g., removal of nutrients and erosion), along with the emission of greenhouse gases
(GHG). Globally, agriculture is an important part of climate change, being responsible
for 14% of global GHG emissions (30% when considering also deforestation and
changes in land use). However, agriculture has the potential to contribute to mitigate
this global phenomenon, through mitigation, reduction and/or elimination of a
significant amount of global emissions: about 70% of this potential mitigation can
be implemented in developing countries (FAO-Adapt, 2012)
Faced with the challenge of food security, climate change and soil conservation,
a more productive and resilient agriculture will require better management of
natural resources such as water, soil and genetic resources through practices such
as conservation agriculture, integrated nutrition and preservation of organic matter,
integrated pest and disease management and agroforestry.
The transformation of agriculture is being promoted by FAO and other partners
through the “Climate-Smart Agriculture” which sustainably increases productivity and
resilience (adaptation) and reduces/eliminates greenhouse gases (mitigation)2.
Recycling organic waste from forestry, farming and cattle management production
process, transforms waste into inputs that can be returned into the soil, providing
nutrients and beneficial microorganisms, improving water retention and cation
exchange (CIC) and increasing production profitability. From the environmental
point of view, this recycling of materials and their application to the soil, provides
many benefits, such as increasing organic matter in the soil, reducing the methane
produced in landfills or municipal dumps, replacement of peat as substrate, the
uptake of carbon, the soil temperature control and increasing the porosity of the soil,
thereby reducing the risk of erosion and desertification.
Composting is a widely accepted practice as a sustainable practice used in all systems
associated with climate-smart agriculture. It offers enormous potential for all sizes of
farms and agro-ecological systems and combines environmental protection with a
sustainable agricultural production.

2 http://www.fao.org/climatechange/climatesmart/es/
4
2. Importance of
organic matter in
the soil
©FAO/Pilar Roman
5
2. Importance of organic
matter in the soil
The organic matter is one of the most important components of soil. Although we think it as
a single compound, its composition is quite diverse since is the result of the decomposition
of animals, plants and microorganisms in the soil or in off-farm materials. It is this diverse
composition what makes organic matter important since many different products are obtained
from the decomposition process which acts as the bricks of the soil that build organic matter.
Although there is no single concept regarding soil organic matter, it is defined as any matter
of animal or plant origin returned to the soil after a decomposition process that involves
microorganisms. It may be leaves, dead roots, exudates, manure, urine, feathers, hair,
bones, carcass, and microorganisms such as bacteria, fungi and nematodes that provide
the soil with organic substances or its own cells when dead.
These materials initiate a process of decomposition and mineralization, and change its
organic form (living beings) to its inorganic form (minerals, soluble or insoluble). These
minerals flow through the soil solution and finally are used by plants and organisms, or
stabilized to become humus, through the process of humification.
This same process occurs in a compost pile. In the soil, the organic matter composed of
complex sugars (lignin, cellulose, hemicellulose, starch, present in plant wastes especially)
Figure 2 Schematic of the evolution of organic matter in the soil
Mineralization
Mineral compounds
Degradation
Fresh organic matter
Aromatic
compounds
Lignin
Tannin
Aliphatic
compounds
Cellulose
Hemicellulose
Proteins
Humification
Simple compounds
Phenolic precursors
Sugars and
aminoacids
Energy support for
microorganisms
Source: Adapted from Ribó 2004.

6
Humic compounds
Oxidation
Polymerization
Polymerized nucleus
Fulvic acids
Humic acids
and proteins (present in animal waste in particular), is attacked by microorganisms, that decompose
it to form more microorganisms. This process also generates biomass, heat, water and more
decomposed organic matter. However, no reference is made to composting in the soil because the
process can occur under aerobic or anaerobic conditions (such as rice crops under flood), and
the typical heating phases (or thermophile or sanitation) are not present. This means that in the
microorganisms present in the field such as cattle manure for example, (when applied fresh on the
field or leave the excrement unturned) parasites’ eggs and cysts are left.
The organic matter can be applied to the soil in the following state:
- fresh, as manure in the same plot,
- dry, as mulch or dead coverage from crop waste (straw or cultivated fallow),
- processed, whether as compost, vermicomposting, slurry or stabilized (for example, manure or
guano).
Once these substances have reached the maximum degree of decomposition, they remain in the
soil, forming carbon complexes, highly stable and slowly degraded. This new material is humus.
It is then, the most stabilized matter as humic and fulvic acids, that has undergone a process of
mineralization, involving microorganisms and then a humification process.
Humic substances that are part of organic matter are formed by chemical and biological degradation
of plant and animal waste and synthesis activities carried out by soil microorganisms.
The content of organic matter in soils varies between 2 and 8 grams of organic matter per kilogram
of soil; the first number corresponds to deserts, the second to peatlands, being common for mineral
soils to contain between 10 and 40 grams of organic matter per kilogram of soil in the most
superficial area (Magdoff and Weil, 2004). However, the amount of organic matter depends not
only on soil microorganisms, but also the type of soil, vegetation, environmental conditions such
as moisture and temperature. Rise in rainfall or irrigation under average temperature conditions
causes the multiplication of microorganisms that use more organic matter and the decomposition
continues. Therefore, the application of organic matter to soils must be a permanent practice,
considering not only increasing the percentage of organic matter or feeding soil microorganisms,
but also the various benefits to the soil.

7
• Improves physical properties:
- Facilitating soil management for ploughing or seeding
- Increasing moisture retention capacity of soil.
- Reducing the risk of erosion.
- Helping to regulate soil temperature (edaphic temperature).
- Reducing water evaporation and regulating moisture.
• Improves chemical properties:
- Supplying macronutrients such as N, P, K and micronutrients.
- Improving cations exchange capacity.
• Improves biological activity:
- Providing organisms (such as bacteria and fungi) capable to transform insoluble matter into plant
nutrients and degrade harmful substances.
- Improving soil conditions and providing carbon to keep biodiversity of micro and macro fauna
(earthworms).
Other additional benefit of composting is the reduction of bad odour from rotting and elimination
of vectors such as insects and rats. It also has a very important role in the elimination of human
pathogens, food contaminating bacteria, and also weed seeds and other unwanted plants.

8
3. Theoretical
foundations of
composting
©FAO/Pilar Roman
9
3.Theoretical foundations
of composting
3.1 Composting process
One of the environmental problems of farms are the organic waste from pruning,
harvesting, post-harvest, manure, grass, fallen fruit, among others. Normally, due to
ignorance, lack of adequate space, or time, the common practice with these wastes is
burning, burying or abandoning them out in the open until rot.
Composting provides the chance to safely transform organic waste into inputs for
agricultural production. FAO defines composting as the mixture of organic matter
digested aerobically that is used to improve soil structure and provide nutrients (FAO
Term Portal, FAOTERM3).
However, not all materials that have been transformed aerobically are considered
compost. The composting process includes several phases that must be met to obtain
quality compost. The use of a material that has not successfully completed the composting
process (raw or only stabilized) (See Chapter 3.3) can lead to risks such as:
• Phytotoxicity. In a material that has not finished the composting process adequately,
nitrogen is in the form of ammonium instead of nitrate. Ammonium in hot and humid
conditions is transformed into ammonia, creating a toxic environment for plant growth,
resulting in odours. Similarly, unfinished compost contains unstable volatile chemicals
such as organic acids that are toxic to seeds and plants.
• The biological block of nitrogen, also known as “nitrogen starvation”.
Occurs in materials that have not reached a balanced C:N ratio and are far richer in
carbon than in nitrogen. When applied to soil, microorganisms quickly use de C present
in the material increasing the consumption of N and exhausting the reserves of N.
• Root oxygen reduction. When material in the decay phase is applied to soil,
microorganisms will use the oxygen of the soil to continue the process, exhausting it and
not making it available to plants.
• Excess ammonium and nitrate in plants and contamination of water
sources. A material with excess nitrogen in the form of ammonium tends to lose it
by infiltration into the soil or volatilization and contributes to contaminate trickling and
underground water. Likewise, it can also be taken by the crop, producing an excessive
accumulation of nitrates, with negative consequences on the quality of fruit (softening,
short post-harvest time) and human health (especially leafy vegetables)
3 http://www.fao.org/termportal/thematic-glossaries/en/
10
3.2 Composting phases
Composting is a biological process that occurs under aerobic conditions (presence
of oxygen). With adequate moisture and temperature, a hygienic transformation of
organic wastes in a homogeneous and plant available material.
Composting can be interpreted as the sum of complex metabolic processes performed
by different microorganisms that, in the presence of oxygen, use nitrogen (N) and
carbon (C) available to produce their own biomass. In this process, additionally, the
microorganisms generate heat and a solid substrate, with less carbon and nitrogen,
but more stable, which is called compost.
Upon decomposition of C, N and all initial organic matter, microorganisms release
measurable heat through temperature variations over time. Depending on the
temperature generated during the process, three main phases are identified in
composting, besides a phase of maturation of variable duration. The different phases
of composting are divided according to temperature in:
1. Mesophilic phase. The composting process starts at ambient temperature
and in a few days (or even hours), the temperature rises to 45°C. This temperature
increase is due to microbial activity since, in this phase, the microorganisms use
C and N sources generating heat. Decomposition of soluble compounds, such as
sugars, produces organic acids and hence, pH can drop (to about 4.0 or 4.5). This
phase lasts a few days (two to eight days).
2. Thermophilic and Hygienization phase. When the parent material
reaches temperatures higher than 45°C, the microorganisms that develop at average
temperatures (mesophilic microorganisms) are replaced by those that grow at higher
temperatures, mostly bacteria (thermophilic bacteria) that facilitate degradation
of complex sources of C, such as cellulose and lignin. These microorganisms act
transforming nitrogen into ammonia, so the average pH rises. In particular, over
60°C, bacteria producing spores and actinobacteria which are responsible for
breaking down waxes, hemicellulose and other compounds of C complex, begin to
develop. This phase can last from days to months, depending on the parent material,
climatic and site conditions, and other factors.
This phase is also called hygienization phase since the heat generated destroys
bacteria and contaminants of faecal origin such as Escherichia coli and Salmonella
spp. Similarly, as discussed in Chapter 3.4, this phase is important as temperatures
above 55°C eliminate the helminth’s cysts and eggs, spores of phytopathogen fungi
and weed seeds that can be found in the parent material, giving rise to a hygienized
product.

11
3. Cooling or Mesophilic phase II. Once carbon and nitrogen sources in
composting material are exhausted, temperature drops again to about 40-45°C.
During this phase, polymers degradation as cellulose continues and some fungi
visible to the naked eye appear (Figure 3). Below 40°C, mesophilic organisms resume
their activity and pH of the medium decreases slightly while, in general, pH remains
slightly alkaline. Some fungi can develop and even produce visible structures. This
cooling phase requires several weeks and may be confused with the maturation
phase.

©M.M.Martinez
Figure 3 fungus indicating mesophilic phase II
Source: CATA-USM, Chile.

4. Maturation phase. This phase lasts months at ambient temperature,
during which side reactions such as carbonaceous compounds condensation and
polymerization occur to form humic and fulvic acids.

12
Figure 4 Temperature, pH and oxygen in the composting process
Source: P. Roman, FAO
3.3 Monitoring during composting
Since composting is a biological process carried out by microorganisms, parameters
affecting their growth and reproduction should be taken into account. These factors
include oxygen or aeration, substrate moisture, temperature, pH and the C:N ratio.
Externally, the composting process largely depends on environmental conditions, the
method used, raw materials, and other elements, so that some parameters may vary.
However, they must be under constant surveillance to always be within an optimal range.
The parameters and their optimal ranges are listed below.

Oxygen
Composting is an aerobic process and adequate ventilation should be maintained to allow
respiration of microorganisms that release carbon dioxide (CO2) into the atmosphere.
Likewise, aeration prevents material to compact or fill with water. Oxygen requirements
vary during the process, reaching the highest rate of consumption during the thermophilic
phase (Figure 4).

13
The oxygen saturation in the medium should not be lower than 5%, being the optimal
level 10%. Excessive aeration will cause a temperature drop and great loss of moisture
by evaporation, causing the decomposition process to stop due to lack of water. The cells
of microorganisms dehydrate, some produce spores and enzyme activity responsible for
the degradation of the different compounds stops. Conversely, a low aeration prevents
enough water evaporation, generating excessive moisture and an anaerobic environment.
Odours and acidity are then produced by the presence of compounds such as acetic acid,
hydrogen sulphide (H2S) or methane (CH4) in excess.

Table 1 Aeration control
Aeration
Percentage
<5%
Problem
Low
aeration
Insufficient water evaporation,
generating excessive moisture and
anaerobiosis environment
Solutions
Volteo de la mezcla y/o adición de material
estructurante que permita la aireación .

5% - 15% ideal range
>15%
Excessive
aeration
Drop in temperature and
evaporation of water, causing the
decomposition process to stop due
to lack of water
Chop the material in order to reduce porous
size and hence, aeration. Moisture should be
regulated by adding water or fresh material or
with more water content (fruit and vegetative
scraps, grass, liquid manure and others).

Carbon dioxide (CO2)
As in all aerobic process, either in composting or even in human breath, oxygen serves
to transform (oxidize) C present in raw material (substrate or food) into fuel. Through
the oxidation process, C transforms into biomass (more microorganisms) and carbon
dioxide (CO2) or gas from respiration, which is a source of carbon for plants and other
organisms that perform photosynthesis. However, CO2 is also a greenhouse gas, i.e.,
it contributes to climate change.
During composting, CO2 is released through the microorganisms respiration and
therefore, the concentration varies with the microbial activity and the raw material used
as substrate. In general, they generate 2-3 kg of CO2 per tonne daily. CO2 produced
during the composting process is generally deemed to have low environmental impact,
because it is captured by plants for photosynthesis.

14
Moisture
Moisture is a parameter closely related to microorganisms, because, like all living beings,
they use water to transport nutrients and energy elements through the cell membrane.
The ideal moisture of the compost is around 55%, although it varies depending on
physical condition, size of the particles and the composting system (see chapter on
Particle Size). If moisture drops below 45%, microbial activity decreases, the degradation
phases cannot be completed and hence, the resulting product is biologically unstable. If
the moisture is too high (> 60%), water will saturate the pores and interfere oxygenation
through the material.
In processes in which the main components are substrates such as sawdust, wood chips,
straw and dry leaves, the need for irrigation during composting is greater than in wetter
materials such as kitchen waste, vegetable, fruit and grass clippings.
The optimal moisture content for composting is 45% to 60% water by weight of the base
material.

Table 2 Optimal moisture parameters
Moisture
percentage
<45%
Problem
Insufficient
moisture
Can stop composting due to lack of
water for microorganisms
Solutions
Moisture should be regulated, either
by adding water or fresh material with
higher water content (fruit and vegetal
waste, grass, liquid manure or others)
45% - 60% ideal range
>60%
Insufficient
oxygen
Too wet material, oxygen is displaced.
Can develop zones of anaerobiosis.

Turn the mixture and/or add low
moisture content material with high
carbon content such as sawdust, straw
or dry leaves.

15
Temperature
Ambient temperature has a wide range of variation depending on the phase of the
process (Figure 4). Composting begins at ambient temperature that can rise up to
65°C with no need of human intervention (external heating). During the maturation
phase temperature drops at ambient temperature.
It is desirable that temperature does not drop too fast, since the higher the temperature
and the longer the time, the higher the decomposition rate and hygienization.

Table 3 Optimal temperature parameters
Temperature
(°C)
Low
temperature
(ambient T
< 35°C)
High
temperature
(ambient T
>70°C)
16
Related causes
Solutions
Insufficient
moisture.

Low temperatures can occur by several factors,
such as lack of moisture, so that microorganisms
reduce the metabolic activity and therefore,
temperature drops.

Wet the material or add fresh
material with higher moisture
percentage (fruit or vegetable
waste or others)
Insufficient
material.

Insufficient material or inadequate pile shape to
reach the appropriate temperature.

Add more material to the
composting pile.

Nitrogen
deficit or low
C:N ratio
The material has a high C: N ratio and hence,
the microorganisms are lacking the necessary N
to produce proteins and enzymes and slow down
their activity. The pile takes more than week to
increasing the temperature.

Add high N content material
such as manure.

Insufficient
ventilation
and moisture
The temperature is too high and the decomposition
is inhibited, since most microorganisms are
inactive and die.

Turn the mixture and/or add
high C content material of
slow degradation (wood or
dry grass) to slow down the
process.

pH
The composting pH depends on the source materials and varies in each phase of the
process (from 4.5 to 8.5). In the early phases of the process, the pH was acidified by
the formation of organic acids. In the thermophilic phase, due to the conversion of
ammonium into ammonia, the pH rises, the medium is alkalised to finally stabilize at
values close to neutral.
The pH determines the survival of microorganisms and each group has optimal pH
for growth and multiplication. Most bacterial activity occurs at pH 6.0-7.5, while
most fungal activity occurs at pH 5.5 to 8.0. The ideal range is from 5.8 to 7.2
Table 4 Optimal pH parameters
pH
<4,5
Related causes
Excess of
organic
acids
Plant materials such as kitchen waste, fruit,
release many organic acids and tend to acidify the
medium.

Solutions
Add material rich in nitrogen
until an appropriate C: N ratio is
achieved.

4,5 – 8,5 ideal range
>8,5
Excess of N
When there is excess of nitrogen in the source
material, with poor C: N ratio related to moister
and high temperatures, ammonia is produced and
the medium is alkalised.

Add dry material with high carbon
content (pruning, dry leaves,
sawdust)
Carbon-Nitrogen (C: N) ratio
The C: N ratio changes according to the parent material and the numeric ratio is
obtained by dividing total C content (total C %) over the total N content (total N %),
of the material to compost.
This ratio also varies throughout the process, with a continuous reduction from 35:1
to 15:1.
For more information, see Table 15.

Table 5 Carbon/Nitrogen ratio parameters
C:N
>35:1
<15:1
Excess of
Carbon
Related causes
There is a large amount of carbon-rich materials in
the mixture. The process tends to cool and to slow
down.

Solutions
Add nitrogen-rich material until
an appropriate C: N ratio is
achieved.

Excess of
Nitrogen
15:1 – 35:1 ideal range
There is a higher amount of nitrogen-rich material
in the mixture. The process tends to overheat
generating odours from the ammonia released.

Add material with high carbon
content (pruning, dry leaves,
and sawdust).

17
Particle size
Microbial activity is related to particle size, that is, easy access to the substrate. If
particles are small, there is a greater specific surface, which facilitates access to the
substrate. The ideal size of the parent materials for composting is 5 to 20 cm.
The material density, and therefore the aeration of the pile or moisture retention, is
closely related to the particle size, being the density approximately 150 -250 kg/ m3.
As the composting process progresses, the size reduces and therefore, the density
increases, 600-700 kg/ m3.

Table 6 Particle size control
Particle
size
(cm)
>30 cm
Problem
Excess of
aeration
Oversized materials form aeration channels,
dropping the temperature and slowing down the
process
Solutions
Chop the material up to an
average size of 10-20 cm.

5 – 30 cm ideal range
<5 cm
Compaction
Too fine particles form small pores that fill with
water, facilitating compaction of the material and a
restricted flow of air causing anaerobiosis.

Compost pile or volume
There are different compost systems: in boxes, piles, open or closed.

Figure 5 Common compost systems
18
Turn and/or add larger
particles to homogenise.

The size of the compost pile, especially height, directly affects the moisture and oxygen
content and temperature. Piles of low height and wide base, despite having good initial
moisture and good C:N ratio, easily lose heat generated by the microorganisms so, the
few degrees of temperature achieved, is lost. The size of the pile is determined by the
amount of material to be composted and the available area to perform the process.
Normally, compost piles are 1.5 - 2 meters high to ease turn over, and 1.5 - 3 meters
wide. The length of the pile depends on the area and handling procedures.

Figure 6 Dimensions of a small farmer compost pile
1,5 - 2 m
xm
1,5 - 3 m
In the estimation of the compost pile dimensions it is important to consider that during
composting, the pile decreases in size (up to 50%) due to compaction and loss of carbon
as CO2.

Table 7 Compost parameters
Parameter
C:N
Moisture
Oxygen concentration
Particle size
pH
Temperature
Density
Organic matter (Dry base)
Total Nitrogen (Dry base)
Ideal range at
the beginning
(2-5 days)
25:1 – 35:1
50% - 60%
~10%
<25 cm
6,5 – 8,0
45 – 60°C
250-400 kg/m3
50%-70%
2,5-3%
Ideal range of
thermophilic phase II
(2-5 weeks)
15/20
45%-55%
~10%
~15 cm
6,0-8,5
45°C- Ambient temperature
<700 kg/m3
>20%
1-2%
Ideal range of
mature compost
(3-6 months)
10:1 – 15:1
30% - 40%
~10%
<1,6 cm
6,5 – 8,5
Ambient temperature
<700 kg/m3
>20%
~1%
19
3.4 Hygienization and safety
As a result of the high temperatures reached during the thermophilic phase, pathogenic
bacteria and parasites in the parent waste are destroyed. It is in this phase that material
hygienization occurs. In subsequent phases recontamination of the material due to
several factors may occur, such as the use of contaminated fresh material as a shovel for
turning over, or the addition of fresh material after the thermophilic phase.
A mature compost should not contain toxic compounds for plants or the environment.
For example, the presence of ammonia and sulphate (NH3 and SO4) in leachates
generated in the composting processes with excess moisture, favour the production of
hydrogen sulphide and nitrogen dioxide (H2S and NO2) which together with the methane
(CH4) are considered greenhouse gases (GHG) with significant negative impacts on the
environment, particularly on climate change.
Various Latin American countries that base its work on both US standards (EPA) and
the European Union (EU) have developed regulations to define the quality of compost
and its use (see Annex 7.3). In addition to defining the quality of compost, in Chile,
Colombia, Mexico, they separate the compost into two classes, A and B, with or without
restrictions on use, based on the presence of pathogens and heavy metals. One of the
problems of using compost relates to the possibility that could have pathogenic bacteria
such as Salmonella spp. and Escherichia coli (Islam 2005, Lasaridi 2006), Listeria
monocytogenes (Oliveira 2011), and parasite eggs that can reach consumers through
contaminated fruit and vegetables. Therefore, it is important to ensure that the compost
used, in especial, to grow short stem or leaf vegetables, as well as for the production of
fruits, does not contain these pathogens and indicators of faecal contamination.
Another key aspect is the presence of heavy metals in compost, as they are compounds
that do not destroy or decompose, and can be absorbed by plants, and then animals
and man, along the food chain. The guarantee that the compost does not contain these
pathogens or heavy metals, besides toxic compounds, hydrocarbons etc., is what is
called safety and offers the user the certification that the compost will not contaminate
the food to be fertilised.
The presence of pathogens in compost comes largely from the use of manures, followed
by use of contaminated water and compost handlers (Bernal 2009). One control
method is the use of high temperatures hence, the importance to control the time and
temperature of the thermophilic phase.
The biological safety of the compost, which depends on the temperature reached by the
material, but also moisture, aeration and particle size. In a pile with adequate moisture,
microbial activity causes the temperature to increase, being higher inside than outside
(Gong 2007). Thus, by aerating the pile or turning it over, temperature and moisture
can be homogenized and kill pathogens. Similarly, the particle size to be composted, the
shape and size of the pile also affect the rate of aeration and the tendency of the material
20
to hold or release heat. Consideration should also be given to the temperature of
the place and management practices in each case. Another important aspect is the
amount of pathogenic microorganisms in the compost because, if this number is
high, more time will be required to eliminate them.
So, the final compost may contain pathogen microorganisms that affect the quality
of the fertilizer. Table 8 shows data regarding time and temperature to eliminate
some pathogens.

Table 8 Temperature required to eliminate some pathogens
Microorganism
Temperature
Exposure time
55°C
1 hour
65°C
15-20 minutes
55°C
1 hour
65°C
15-20 minutes
55°C
1 hora
62°C
3 minutes
Parvovirus bovino
55°C
1 hour
Ascaris lumbricoides eggs
55°C
3 days
Salmonella spp
Escherichia coli
Brucella abortus
Source: Jones and Martin, 2003
Annex 7.3 Compost safety analysis, provides more information on quality standards.

3.5 Composting material
The vast majority of organic materials are compostable. Below there is a list of
materials that can be composted:
• Rests of harvest, orchard or garden plants. Crushed or chopped branches
from pruning, tree and shrub leaves. Hay and mown grass. Lawn or grass
(preferably pre-dried in thin layers)
• Pig manure, cattle dung manure, cow dung.
• Organic waste from kitchen (fruit, vegetables). Damaged or out of date
food. Egg shell (preferably crushed). Coffee, tea waste. Dried fruit and
nuts shell. Orange, lemon or pine apple skin (a few and chopped). 		
Damaged, rotten or germinated potatoes.
21
• Edible oil and fat (fairly spread and in small quantity).
• Wood shavings (fine layers).
• Napkins, tissues, paper and cardboard (not printed or coloured or mixed
with plastic).
• Hair cut (not coloured), animals’ shear.
No inert, toxic or harmful materials should be included, namely:
• Chemical-synthetic residues, adhesive, solvents, petrol, lubricants, paint
• Non-degradable materials (glass, metals, plastics).
• Agglomerate or plywood (free from shavings or sawdust).
• Tobacco, since it contains a powerful biocide such as nicotine and various
toxic substances.
• Detergents, chlorinated products, antibiotics, drug residues.
• Carcass (animals should be incinerated in special conditions or composted
in special piles).
• Cooked food leftovers, meat.

3.6 Fertilization
Compost contains fertilizing elements for plants, although in an organic form and in
a smaller amount than synthetic mineral fertilizers. One of the biggest advantages
of using compost as input of organic matter, is that it contains available nutrients of
slow release, beneficial for plant nutrition. Moreover, the compost has a high content
of organic matter with the advantages that entails (Chapter 2). It is recommended
that, before applying compost or organic matter (knowing its chemical composition),
as well as mineral fertilizers, perform a soil test to control nutrient levels and adjust
fertilization based on the release mechanism and crop needs.
The nutrients needed for plant growth come from air, water and soil, being the
soil solution the means of transport of nutrients. They are divided into macro- and
micronutrients, depending on the amounts that the plant needs. Primary macronutrients
are Nitrogen, Phosphorus and Potassium, and secondary macronutrients are
22
Magnesium, Sulphur and Calcium (Figure 7). Micronutrients are required in very small
quantity but, in general, are important for plant and animal metabolism. These include
iron, zinc, manganese, boron, copper, molybdenum and chlorine.
Nitrogen, N (1% - 4%) of the dry matter of the plant) is the growth engine of the plant
because it is involved in all major processes of plant development. A good nitrogen
supply is also important for the absorption of other nutrients.
Phosphorus, P (0.1% - 0.4%) of dry plant extract) plays an important role in energy
transfer, so it is essential for the efficiency of photosynthesis. Phosphorus is scarce in
most natural or agricultural soils or where the pH limits its availability, favouring its
fixation.
Potassium, K (1% -4%) of the dry plant extract) plays a vital role in the synthesis of
carbohydrates and proteins, and therefore, in the structure of the plant. Potassium
improves the hydrologic regime of the plant and increases its tolerance to drought,
frost and salinity. Plants with appropriate supply of K are less susceptible to diseases.

Figure 7 Average composition of plants
Chlorine Sodium
Silicium
Sulfure
Magnessium
Other elements
Calcium
Hydrogen
7%
7%
44%
Carbon
42%
Nitrogen
Oxygen
Phosphorous
Potassium
23
Compost nutrients content is highly variable (Table 9) since it depends on origin
material:
Table 9 Average nutrients content in compost
Nutrient
Nitrogen
% in compost
0.3% – 1.5% (3g to 15g per kg of compost)
Phosphorus
0.1% – 1.0% (1g to 10g per kg of compost)
Potassium
0.3% – 1.0% (3g to 10g per kg of compost)
Source: Jacob, 1961, Martínez, 2013
To decide on the application of compost as organic fertilizer as well as integral
nutrition with mineral fertilizers, the following parameters should be taken into
account:
- Crop fertilization requirement (soil and leaves analysis)
- Access and availability of both fertilizers locally
- Cost of both fertilizers
- Soil requirements of organic matter
Each crop requires a specific quantity of nutrients that depends on the expected
crop yield. To calculate the actual requirement of fertilizers, other factors such as
soil nutrient reserves and immobilization or loss of nutrients when applied either by
fixation or leaching should be take into account (See Annex 7.2 How to determine
nutrient requirements in the field).
Table 10 shows nutrient requirements per crop although, in general, due to
aforementioned loss, nutrient requirements exceed their availability.

24
Table 10 Extraction of nutrients per crop (kg/ha)
Phosphorous
Potassium
N
P205
K20
K
3.000
50
26
11
80
66
6.000
10
50
21
160
132
3.000
72
27
11
65
54
5.000
140
60
25
130
107
3.000
72
36
15
54
45
6.000
120
50
21
120
99
20.000
140
39
17
190
157
40.000
175
80
34
310
256
15.000
70
20
8
110
91
40.000
190
75
32
390
322
25.000
161
39
17
136
112
40.000
210
70
30
350
289
50.000
60
50
21
150
124
100.000
110
90
38
340
281
Onion
35.000
120
50
21
160
132
Tomato
40.000
60
30
13
124
124
Rice
Wheat
Corn
Potato
Sweet potato
Yucca
Sugar cane
Capacity
Nitrogen
Kg/ha
P
Source: Fertilizer Industry Advisory Committee of Experts (FIAC)
25
A mineral fertilizer is such industrialized product containing at least 5% of one or
more of the primary nutrients (N, P, K). These nutrients are generally expressed in
percentages of N, P2O5, K2O (Table 11). These fertilizers can be simple (with one
primary nutrient) or multi-nutrients (with two or three primary nutrients).

Table 11 Fertilizers most commonly tosed
Fertilizer sources
Molecular Formula
N-P2O5-K2O
Urea
CO(NH2)2
46 — —
Ammonium nitrate
NH4(NO3)
34 — —
Ammonium Sulphate
(NH4)2SO4
21 — —
Monoammonium phosphate
NH4H2PO4
12 50 —
Simple Superphosphate
Ca(H2PO4)2
— 20 —
Potassium Chloride
KCl
— — 60
Potassium Sulphate
K2SO4
— — 52
Compost
-
0.6 – 0.7 – 0.6
According to Table 10 a 50 kg bag of urea will have 23kg of Nitrogen (46% of 50
kg). To calculate P and K, the molecular weight of its oxide should be considered
(Table 11).

Table 12 Conversion among P 2 O 5 , K 2 O, y P, K
% P 2 O5
X 0,44
%P
X 2,3
% K 2O
X 0,83
X 1,2
26
%K
Example 1:
Calculation of N, P y K
To know the quantity of N, P and K available in a fertilizer 16-6-12. The bag
weight is 25 kg.
The numbers related to the fertilization degree are a percentage of the weight
of the nutrients in the fertilizer:
•
N content= 0,16 x 25 kg = 4 kg of N
The conversion factor for P2O5 es 0,44, so
•
P content = 0,06 x 0.44 x 25 kg = 0,66 kg of P
The conversion factor for K2O es 0,83, so
•
K content= 0,12 x 0,83 x 25 kg = 2,5 kg of K
N, P and K content in 25 kg of that fertilizer is: 4 kg of N, 0,6 kg of P and 2.5
kg of K
The use of mineral fertilizers creates farmer dependency; it is expensive in terms of
production and transport.
The fertilizer cost and availability are important factors in the decision about its
application.

27
Example 2:
Economic comparison of fertilizers
To compare the economic value of a fertilizer and market value of a compost and various
simple fertilizers. (Urea, Simple Superphosphate and Potassium Chloride)
Table 13 Fertilizer cost
Fertilizer
Cost 1 tonne*
Nutrients per tonne
Compost
50 USD**
15 kg N, 10 kg P and 10 kg K (Table 9)
Urea
393 USD
460 kg N (Table 10)
Simpe
superphosphate
435 USD
88 kg P (Table 10)
Potassium
chloride
395 USD
498 kg K (Table 10)
Therefore, the unit cost per nutrient is:
Nutrient
Compost
N
3,33 USD/kg
P
5 USD/kg
K
5 USD/kg
Total
13,33 USD
Urea
Simle
Superphosphate
Potassium
Cloride
0,85 USD/kg
4,94 USD/kg
0,79 USD/kg
6,58 USD
It is noted that compost has a higher price than mineral fertilizers for its content of N, P
and K. Not only the economic cost of its application should be taken into account, but
also the additional benefits, such as micronutrient content or organic matter content. (See
Chapter 2)
*Source: World Bank, January 2013
**bulk compost (when packed, the price may rise up to USD 100 per tonne)
The farmer must analyse the pros and cons and decide what fertilizing mechanism will apply to the
crop. The actions of the two fertilizers (organic and mineral) can combine and complement.
Demand = Δ Organic supply + Δ Mineral supply
28
Example 3:
Calculation of fertilization requirements of a crop
We want to fertilize two hectares of wheat, combining compost and other simple fertilizers.
The requirements of wheat nutrients for 3t/ha are:
N: 72kg/ha, P2O5: 27kg/ha, K2O: 65kg/ha
It is noted that the application of a compost dose of 9th/ha will cover the phosphorus
requirements (it is considered an average composition per kg compost of: 6 g Nitrogen, 3g
Phosphorus and 3 g Potassium):
9t compost is: N: 54kg/ha, P2O5: 27kg/ha, K2O: 45kg/ha
Urea and chlorine may be applied to cover nitrogen and potassium requirements.
• Nitrogen requirements after compost application: 72 – 54= 18kg/ha
Urea has 46% N (46 kg N per 100 kg urea) so the application of urea of 39kg/ha urea
100 kg urea
46 kg N
X kg urea
18 kg N
X = 39 kg urea
It should be considered that just a 65% N will be available for the plant since N loss are
estimated due to denitrification, leaching and mobilization.
• K2O requirements after compost application: 65 – 45 = 20 kg/ha
Potassium chloride has 60% K2O, so an application of 33kg/ha of potassium chloride will
cover potassium requirements.
100kg KCl
X kg KCl
60kg de K2O
20 kg K2O
X = 33 kg KCl
Fertilizer requirements for two hectares are:
18 tons compost
78 kg urea
66 kg potassium chloride
In organic agriculture and family farming is common to use only organic fertilizers such as compost,
compost tea, vermicompost (Chapter 5).
29
3.7 Compost application
Compost may be applied as semi-mature (Mesophilic phase II - 3) or mature. The
semi-mature compost has high biological activity and the percentage of nutrients easily
assimilated by plants is higher than in mature compost. On the other hand, having a pH
not yet stable (closer to acidity) can adversely affect germination, so this compost is not
used to germinate seeds, or delicate plants.
The application of semi-mature compost in horticultural crops is usually a spring
application of 4 – 5 kg/m2 on land previously cultivated (cauliflower, celery, potatoes ...).
For field crops, the application is 7-10 t/ha of compost.
The mature compost is used largely for seedlings, planters and pots. Is usually mixed (20%
-50%) with soil and other materials such as peat and rice husk as substrate preparation
(Figure 8).

©E. Murillo
Figura 8 Preparation of the substrate.

30
3.8 Costs
In order to analyse the economic costs of composting, it is necessary to analyse the following three
factors:
• Decision on the preferred system (Chapter 4.2 Composting Techniques)
• Quantity and type of organic matter used to compost
• Quantity of compost to be used in the farm and quantity to be sold
For this, an “income-expenses” table like the one below could be used. The economic example is
the production compost from pig litter (Experience in Neiva, Colombia, detailed in 6.1).
Under this system, 10 compost tons are produced every 6 months, from slurry of 20 pigs and 750kg
of rice husk. The economic balance of Table 14 corresponds to a batch (6 months) of 2012.

Table 14 Economic balance of a compost plant
Costs*
Quantity
Unitary cost
(USD)
Total cost
(USD)
Material collection (wage)
2
14
28
Transport (wage)
2
14
28
Weighing and packaging (wage)
6
0,5
14
14
84
7
Polyethylene bags
200
0,1
20
Rice husk (kg)
750
0,1
75
Shovel
2
5,5
11
Wheelbarrow
1
78,5
78,5
Composter construction
1
11,3
11,3
Detail
Control of parameters (wage)
Total costs
342,8
Incomes
Detail
Compost (tonnes)
Total incomes
Economic balance
Quantity
Unitary cost
(USD)
Total cost
(USD)
10
80
800
800
+457,2
* Pig slurry not included as it is a farm surplus
In this case, all the compost produced will be sold. Another option is to cover production costs by selling
part of the compost and the rest for use in the farm.
Regarding the example presented in Table 14, to cover the costs equivalent to USD 342.8 USD, it will be
necessary to sell 4.2 tons of compost, setting aside 5.8 tons available for the farm.
31
32
4. Practical
foundations of
composting
©FAO/Pilar Roman
33
4. Practical foundations of
composting
4.1 Recommended tools
-Pitchfork and/or shovel: to add material, turn and removed finished compost.
-Running shears or crusher: to get appropriate particle size from 5 to 20 cm (See
Chapter 3.3)
-Watering can, hose or sprinkler: to keep proper moisture of the composting
material from 45% to 60% (see technique to measure moisture in Chapter 3.3)
-Thermometer: to measure temperatures of the composting material (See Figure 4).
A metal bar or wooden stick may be used instead.
-Screen: to sieve the material at the end of the composting process and separate
large pieces those have not decomposed yet (Figure 19).
-pH strips (optional): to control acidity during the process (See Chapter 3.3)
There are other tools that help in the work, while not critical, such as rakes,
wheelbarrows, hand aerators, etc.

Figure 9 Recommended tools
34
4.2 Composting techniques
The aim of the techniques to compost organic material is to measure and optimize
process parameters to obtain an end product of quality both, from a sanitary and
fertilization perspective.
Key factors to choose the technique:
-
Process time.

-
Space requirements.

-
Requirements of hygienic safety.

-
Parent material (absence or presence of animal origin material).

-
Climatic conditions (temperatures below zero, strong winds, torrential rains
or other critical climatic events).

The different techniques are generally divided into closed and open systems. Open
systems are those that are carried out outdoors, and closed systems are carried in
containers made, whether or tunnels drums.

4.3 Open systems or piles
This composting technique can be performed when there is an abundant and
varied amount of organic waste (about 1m3 or higher).

©M.A.Martinez
Figure 10 Compost piles. Ciudad Sandino. Nicaragua.

35
Depending on the compost pile management in the plant (space, technology,
retention time), there is a wide variety of piles, shapes, volume, shape, layout and
the space between them.
FAO publication “On-farm Composting Methods”3 (FAO 2003), describes various
techniques of pile formation such as Indore (Indian method) and rural Chinese
composting. All methodologies share the technique of alternating layers of different
material in order to get a good C: N (30:1) ratio and temperature and moisture
control (See Sub-Chapter 4.3.1).
At industrial level, piles are managed with state of the art technology. Some examples
are given below:
- Forced aeration, where air enters through ground channels to keep optimal oxygen
levels.

Figure 11 Forced aeration system
- Leaching collection and subsequent treatment.

Figure 12 Leaching collection system
- Compost piles with a mechanized turning system, using either lateral screwed
canter adapted to a tractor, or a front loader. The first system the pile height varies
with the height of the lateral canter, while in the second system, the piles can reach
three meters height. At family level this is not realistic and the desirable height should
not exceed 1.5 metres to ease the turning activity.

3 On-farm Composting Methods http://www.fao.org/docrep/007/y5104e/y5104e00.htm
36
Figure 13 Mechanized turning
Before starting the composting process, calculate the area to be used and the volume of the pile.
This may pose several limitations, such as the amount of material to be composted, the area to
apply the compost, or the area where the composting process is carried out.

Calculation of the compost pile dimensions according
to the amount of material to compost
Example 4:
A family farmer produces a total of 100 kg a week of vegetable waste from
the orchard and kitchen. He decides to build a pile with the 100 kg a week*.
Considering a density of 250kg/m3 **, the volume of the pile would be:
100kg , x es 0,40m³
250 kg/m³ =
m³
This volume is insufficient to build the pile (minimum volume of 1m3), so at least 250 kg would be
needed to meet the minimum requirements of base and heigth.
If various farmers work jointly and get 1,250 kg a week, the volume would be 5 m3
The pile dimensions would be:
In this case, the formula for the volume of a
parallelepiped is used as an approximate measure
of a pile volume:
Volume parallelepiped = x·y·z
5 m =(x∙y∙z)
3
Assuming a height (y) of 1.5 m and a width (x) of 1.5 m, then the length (z) of the pile will be:
5 m³ =(1,5∙1,5∙z) => length= 2,2 m
*It is advised to build a new pile each week or extend the existing one to avoid adding fresh material
to the thermophilic phase and interrupt the process.
** To calculate the density of the material: take a bucket or bucket of known volume. Weigh the
bucket filled with uncompacted material and subtract the bucket weight. Finally, the weight of the
material is divided by the known volume to obtain the density of the material.
Example: A 10 L bucket (0.01 m3) weighs 3.27 kg (the weight of the bucket is 270 g).
Density =
3kg
= 300 kg/m³
0,01m³
37
Calculation of the compost pile dimensions according
to final compost requirements
Example 5:
A family has an orchard of 100 m2 and
wants to add compost. The average
recommended quantity is 4-5 kg compost
per m2 so it would require 400 to 500 kg
of compost.

From this value, follow the same steps as in
the previous example:
1000 kg =>4 m3 (250 kg/m3 density)
©Field - Nicaragua
Considering that during the decomposition
process up to 50% material is lost (see
section Compost pile size or composting
volume), it is estimated that the parent
material should double the final material. In
this example, the parent material should be
800-1000 kg.

Figure 14 Compost pile
The area is calculated from the volume (the
pile of Figure 14 has a pyramidal shape,
so the formula for the volume of a pyramid
is used instead of a parallelepiped, which is
more appropriate for this case).

4 m3 = triangle area∙length =
Pile’s length= 3,9m
38
bxh
2
x length => 4 =
1,7x1,2 x length
2
Calculation of the compost pile dimensions according
to the available area
Example 6:
If the limitation is the composting area, then the fixed value is the base area (pile’s length
and width)
A family can allocate an area of 3 m2 of the yard to composting. That is the maximum area.
Usually, a 15% of the area is left for contingencies since some material rolls downpile (due
to wind, rain, small animals) to the pile side.

Figure 15 Available composting area
Yard area 3m² (1,5m x 2m)
If the maximum height is 1.5 m, then:
Volume m³=(1,5·1,2·1,7)=>3m³
Pile area 2,5 m²
(1,5m x 2m)
3m³ (Density: 250 kg/m3) correspond to
about 750kg parent material to compost.

39
4.3.1 Tasks to be performed to build and manage
a compost pile
• Selecting and levelling the area. The area is selected according to: weather
conditions, distance from the area of waste production, distance from the area where
the final compost will be applied and ground gradient. It is preferable that the area is
protected from strong winds, at a safe distance from water sources (over 50 metres) to
avoid contamination, and with a slight gradient (<4%) to prevent leaching and erosion
problems.
• Material chopping and pileing. I general, a week is considered as
the time unit to pile up material in the same pile, before the starting of the
thermophilic phase, to prevent re-contamination of the material with fresh material.
Another important aspect here is the mix of materials to achieve an appropriate
C: N ratio. According to Cornell University (1996) the formula to follow is:
R=
Q1x (C1 x (100 - M1) + Q2 (C2 x (100 - M2) + Q3 (C3 x (100 - m3) + ...
Q1x (N1 x (100 - M1) + Q2 (N2 x (100 - M2) + Q3 (N3 x (100 - m3
) + ...

Being Q the quantity of material to be added; C and N the weight of Carbon and
Nitrogen; M the weight of the moisture of the material.
For a quantity Q1 (e.g., straw), calculate the quantity Q2 required (e.g., manure).
This can be estimated as follows:
Q 1x N 1x R Q2=
N2 x
C2
N2
C1
N1
x (100 - M1)
- R x (100 - M2)
To ease the task, use a basic table showing the C:N value of the materials most
commonly used (Table 15 C:N ratio of some materials used in composting) and
make an estimate:
40
Table 15 C:N Ratio of some materials used in
composting
High nitrogen level
Balanced C:N
1:1 – 24:1
25:1 – 40:1
Material
C:N
Material
High carbon level
41:1 – 1000:1
C:N
Material
C:N
Fresh liquid
manure
5
Cattle dung
manure
25:1
Recently mown
grass
43:1
Poultry litter
7:1
Kidney bean
leaves
27:1
Tree leaves
47:1
Pig manure
10:1
Crotalaria
27:1
Sugar cane straw
49:1
Kitchen waste
14:1
Coffee pulp
29:1
Fresh urban
garbage
61:1
Poultry litter with
pen bedding
18:1
Cow dung
32:1
Rice husk
66:1
Banana leaves
32:1
Rice straw
77:1
Vegetable wastes
37:1
Dry grass (grasses)
81:1
Coffee leaves
38:1
Bagasse
104:1
Pruning
44:1
Corn cob
117:1
Corn straw
312:1
Sawdust
638:1
Source: Adapted from UNDP-INFAT (2002)
The ideal C:N ratio to begin composting ranges from 25:1 to 35:1. To calculate
this, the available materials are selected from Table 14 and the C:N ratio of the
materials is calculated separately. A proportional calculation is made to obtain the
amount of each material to be applied to the pile.
This calculation can be used as reference but there will always be a margin of error,
because no adjustment is being made to the moisture of the material or availability
of C or N (for example, cardboard has a high carbon content but it is slow to
decompose).

41
Example 7:
Calculation of the C:N ratio in the mix of various materials.

A farm has poultry litter mixed with pen bedding and fruit tree pruning.
C:N ratio is:
Poultry litter with pen bedding: 18:1 Pruning: 44:1
Poultry
litter
Pruning
A 1:1 ratio from both will give a ratio close to 30:1, so the worker may intersperse layers of both
materials of mix the materials with a shovel and build de pile.

There are also online calculators to calculate the C:N ratio up to three materials
(Figure 16), as the one of Cornell University (in this case, C/N Ratio corresponds to
the C:N ratio).

Figure 16 Calculator of C: N ratio
Source: Cornell University, available at http://compost.css.cornell.edu/calc/2.html
42
• Turning system. Normally, a weekly turn is done during the first 3-4 weeks and
then, one turn every fifteen days. This depends on weather conditions and the material
being composted. It is necessary to check the visual appearance, odour and temperature
to decide when to turn (see next point, temperature control, moisture and pH).
It is important to optimize the space and turning operation. Figure 17 shows some
examples of space optimization.

Figure 17 Turning modalities according to the number
of piles
43
Temperature, moisture and pH control.
• Temperature, moisture and pH control. The homeowner should perform the following
controls:
Temperature. If a thermometer was not available, a metal pole (or wood stick, see Figure
10) may be used. The rod is inserted in various points of the pile and by touching it, an
approximate temperature is determined according to the composting phase and then it is
compared with the recommended temperature for each phase (Table 3 Optimal temperature
parameters).
Moisture. It is possible to apply the so called “fist technique”, which consists of introducing
the hand into the pile, take out a handful of material and open hand. The material must be
matted with no dripping water. If water drips, turn and/or add drying material (sawdust or
straw). If the material is loose in hand, add water and/or fresh material (vegetables waste or
lawn trimming).
Acidity of pH. There are two ways to measure pH: directly in the pile or in a compost extract.
• Measuring pH in the pile: If the compost is wet but not muddy, insert a pH strip in
the compost. Let it stand for a few minutes to absorb the water, and then read the pH
by comparing the colour.
• Measuring pH in aqueous solution4: Take several samples of compost and put them
in containers with water (volume/volume 1:5). Stir and read, preferably with a 		
pH meter,or pH strip instead.
To follow up on the various parameters, use a spreadsheet like the following:
Figure 18 Process control spreadsheet
Source: P. Roman. FAO
4 Protocol of “US Compost Council “ 2010
44
• Verification that composting has finished (maturation phase). To verify that the compost is
in the maturation phase, the material still wet, should not be heated again despite turning it.
However, there are other tests to verify this phase.
If there is access to a laboratory, perform a respiration test.
If there is no laboratory available, take several samples (minimum 3 samples) representing
the size of the pile to analyse the look and smell of composted material. It must be dark,
brown, moist soil scented, and not excessive moisture at the fist test. A quarter can be
performed (division of the pile into 4 equal parts) and take 3 samples of 100 grams of
composted material from each quarter, introduce them in plastic bags and leave for two
days in a cool, dry place. If the bag swollen (air-filled) and shows condensation, this may
indicate that the process has not been completed (immature compost). Another technique is
to introduce a machete or metal instrument, 50 cm long, in the centre of the pile. If after 10
minutes, the machete is taken out and feels hot (cannot touch because it burns), it means
that the material is still in the process of decomposition. In all these cases, the pile must left
to continue the composting process.
• Sieving. Once the compost is mature, the material is sieved in order to remove large
elements and other contaminants (metals, glass, ceramic, stones). The screen mesh size
depends on the regulations of the country, but typically is 1.6 cm.
The big material that does not pass through the screen mesh (Figure 19 Screen used in the
sieving process) is mostly lignocellulosic material (wood) that will return to a new compost
pile to fulfil a dual function, that is, to continue decomposing and serve as composting
bacteria inoculant.

Figure 19 Screen used in the sieving process
There are numerous non-industrial alternatives to the metal mesh, as the examples of
Figure 20.

45
©Field - Paraguay
Figure 20 Alternative sieving instruments
Shade screen. Paraguay.

Rear grill of a stand fan
Nicaragua
Field activities monitoring
To monitor field composting activities, it is advisable to use spreadsheets such as
the ones shown in Figure 18 and Figure 21.

Figure 21 Composting monitoring spreadsheet
Source: P. Roman.

46
4.3.2 Experiences of compost piles in Latin
America
In very rainy or cold weather areas, the pile may be covered with plastic to favor the
rise in temperature and avoid stagnant water.

©FAO/E.Murillo
Figure 22 Compost pile cover to avoid temperature drop and
excess rain. Nicaragua.

Aeration can be improved with different modes of passive ventilation.
-
“Air cushion”. This cushion is formed with thick branches, and is placed as a first
layer of the pile (80 cm). The compost tends to create anaerobic bags in the bottom
centre area and this method improves air circulation homogeneously.

©FAO/Pilar Roman
Figure 23 Photograph and schematic of the air cushion
technique
80 cm built with
branches to create
the air cushion
47
Ventilating stack. During the formation of the pile it is common to insert a pole of
at least 20 cm in diameter and 1.5 meters high. When the pile has already formed,
this pole is removed and the space left acts as a ventilating stack, thus improving air
circulation in the pile.

-
©FAO/Pilar Roman
Figure 24 Photograph and schematic of the ventilating stack
technique
Pile in the Ecologic Farm Fen, Chile
The two techniques can be used together, as in the “pile without turning” (Case
Study 6.3).

4.4 Holding units
This method is often used at homeowner level. The container has a number of
characteristics that favour its replication: prevents accumulation of rain, protects the
material from strong winds, facilitates the turning, facilitates removal of leachate,
controls the invasion of vectors (mice, birds) and prevents access to the composting
material by unauthorized personnel and farm animals. The disadvantage of this
method is that it can reach high temperatures, so the control of parameters becomes
particularly important. In warm climates, earth is usually added to the container (up
to 10%) to control temperature, since earth is stable and does not generate heat.

48
Figure 25 Types of holding units
Metal mesh
Wooden panels
Bricks
Drum
In Latin America is common to use 220 L plastic drums, which can be reuse as
compost bins with some minor modifications. The composting process time is shorter
than in a pile. Depending on the ambient temperature and the parent material, the
product can reach the maturation phase in six to ten weeks.

©FAO/Alberto Pantoja
Figure 26 Turning a horizontal
compost bin
Before starting the process, it is important to choose a suitable container. This choice
is based on the type of drums available, the amount of material to be composted,
the area where the container will be placed (horizontal or vertical), and the type of
process (static or dynamic, which is explained below).
49
There are many materials available to use as compost bin; however, there are two basic modes to
arrange the containers: Vertical (continuous/static) and horizontal (discontinuous/dynamic).
It is the vertical arrangement in which the container rests on its base (Figure 27). Fresh material
is added from the top and the composted material is usually removed from the bottom. It is called
continuous because fresh material enters continuously and the composted product also goes out
continuously from the bottom (if the container requires to be turned to remove the material, then
it is a discontinuous composting container, batch)
The advantages of this system are: easy to handle, requires little investment, suitable for small
areas (the base diameter of a 220 L drum is usually 60 cm) and better control of the leachate (it
usually has a small valve to extract leachate).
Among the disadvantages of this method is that it requires a turning area. The material within the
container can be mixed with a bar, but the result is heterogeneous and there is the risk of creating
anaerobic bags. The material tends to compact and therefore, the moisture distribution is not
uniform, and the top dries faster.

Figure 27 Vertical or continuous compost container
Aeration
Output leachate
Input fresh material
Output composted material
The leachate output is normally a valve or tap than can be open manually every week to
extract the excess flow.
The horizontal arrangement (Figure 28) is one in which the container rests on its longitudinal
axis (in a 220 L drum, the length is 90 cm). It is called discontinuous because it is a “batch”
process. Once the container is loaded, the process should be finished before removing the
compost and introduce new material.
The advantage is that this system has a better moisture distribution and compaction since it is
easy to be turned (crank) and the product obtained is homogeneous.
50
The disadvantage is that this system requires greater investment than the vertical system
since at least two containers are required for the continuity of the process. As the leachate
can leak out through the vents during the turning, a second container needs to be placed
underneath.

Figure 28 Horizontal or discontinuous compost drum
Input and output of material
Aireation
Handle
©FAO/Pilar Roman
Stand for easy
drum rotation
CDC de Managua. Nicaragua
Table 16 Advantages and disadvantages shows a summary of the closed
composting systems.

Table 16 Advantages and disadvantages of closed
composting systems
Investment
Horizontal
Vertical
Handling
Area
Final material
Low
Medium Easy
Small
Heterogeneous
High
Complex
Large
Heterogeneous
51
4.4.1 Tasks to be performed when composting in
containers
Selection of the container. The choice of a vertical or horizontal compost container
will depend on the available space, amount of material to be added and time to be
dedicated to the composting process (See Table 16).
Material chopping and filling the container. It is important that the material have a size
between 5 and 20 cm for optimal decomposition process.
The material should have a C: N ratio from 25:1 to 35:1 for appropriate start of the
process (see Example 5 for the calculation of the C: N ratio). The container is filled
during two or three weeks. After this period, the container is left standing until the
composting process is over and the finished compost is removed.
Control of moisture and aeration, turning, material extraction and sieving. The same
techniques of the pile composting are applied. (See 4.3.1Tasks to be performed to build
and manage a compost pile).

Example 8:
Calculation of the appropriate volume of the compost container.

A family with a home garden of 35 m2 produces 20 kg per week of vegetative food scraps and
kitchen material. The material inside the container tends to compact up to 400kg/m3.
400 kg/m³ =
20kg
, x => 0,05m³ = 50 dm³
m³
If material is added to the container during five weeks, the container should have a volume of at
least 200dm3(equal to 220 L).
A drum of 220 L (220 dm3) would be appropriate for this situation.
This drum can be used and fill the free space with soil.

52
4.5 Decisions Tree
A good way to decide what composting technique to follow is through a decisions tree.

Example 9:
Choice of a composting method in family farming
Example for family farmers.
Compost to
use in:
Orchard
production for
sale
(i.e.>50m²)
Orchard, own
consumption
(i.e.<50m²)
Climatic
conditions (i.e.
< 700 mm
annual rainfall)
Climatic
conditions (i.e.
> 700 mm
annual rainfall)
Fallow
No fallow
Open
container
Closed container
or open container
covered with
a roof
On soil
surface
In piles
Example 10:
Choice of a composting method in urban farming
Example for urban orchards.

Volume of material to
compost
<250 kg
<3m²
>250 kg
1 Continuous drum
Area for compost
production
>3m²
2 Continuous drum
Piles
53
54
5. Compost-related
products
©FAO/Pilar Roman
55
5. Compost-related
products
5.1 Vermicompost
Vermicompost is the process of composting using earthworms and microorganisms.
It is an oxidative process (with air) which ends in the stabilization of organic matter.
Like the mature compost, the final product is organic matter, but the earthworms
perform the process with the help of microorganisms (Lazcano, 2008).
During this process, insoluble minerals are solubilized and made available to plants
when the vermicompost is applied to the soil. Similarly, other complex organic
compounds such as cellulose, are partially degraded to simple compounds by
bacteria in the digestive tract of the earthworm, increasing the availability of N.
To produce vermicompost, the most widely earthworm species used is Eisenia
foetida commonly known as the California red earthworm, despite being native to
Europe. The species receives the name foetida because the odour of its exudates,
which are presumably an anti-predator adaptation.
This species of earthworm is very skilled in the way it feeds because every 24
hours eats food equivalent to its own weight. The earthworm gets its food from
vegetable, animal or mixed organic matter, fresh or in different decomposing
stage, to produce earthworm biomass (growth and new earthworms) and manure.
This species requires high concentrations of organic matter to feed on and some
environmental conditions such as optimal temperature between 19-25 °C, 80%
moisture, pH of 6.5-7.5, in low light. The earthworm survival depends on the
amount of organic matter in the medium, being reduced as the percentage of
organic matter decreases.

©M.M.Martinez
The body of the earthworm looks like a chain of rings. The larger ring called
clitellum contains the reproductive organs. The earthworm is hermaphrodite, i.e.,
the same individual has both sexes, but the reproduction requires two individuals.
Cross-fertilization is carried out by joining the
clitellum of two individuals where copula takes place
every 7-10 days. The two individuals produce eggs,
called Cocoons or Cocun. The eggs are in the shape
of a lemon and yellow-transparent appearance
at the beginning, turning brown as the earthworm
grows (Figure 29). capullos son visibles a simple
vista. Cada capullo contiene de 2 a 12 lombrices
que emergen a los 21 días de ser depositadas. La
lombriz recién eclosionada mide 1mm de longitud.
The cocoons are visible to the naked eye. Each
cocoon contains from 2-12 earthworms that emerge
after 21 days of being deposited. The newly hatched
earthworm measures 1mm in length.

56
Juveniles begin the reproductive period at 3-4 months, when they become adults
and are sexually mature. By that time, they have approximately 3cm. Finally at
7 months they reach their final weight and size of 1 g and 7-8 cm respectively.
In average, they live 10 years (Figure 30). To get vermicompost, it is necessary
to have a container or bedding, food, broodstock and, of course, proper
environmental conditions.

Figure 30 Earthworm life cycle
Clitellum
Adult earthworm
1 we
ek
Semimature earthworms
Cocoon
2 a 4 born earthworms
50
to
65
day
s
14
to
44
ys
da
Source: M. M. Martinez. CATA-USM, Chile
57
For the vermicompost is necessary to have a container or bed, the material to be composted, the
broodstock and suitable environmental conditions to growth the earthworm.
Container or bed: there are different options, sizes and quality of containers to grow earthworms.
The containers should be open to ease feeding and visualization and are usually made of wood.
The earthworms usually dig deeply into the substrate looking for food, but do not reach farther
than 40 cm (Schuldt et al., 2007), so the bed should have a depth of 50-60 cm and 1 m wide;
the length depends on the available area. The bed should be protected from rain, sunlight and
extreme temperatures in times of frost or winter.

Figure 32 Vermicompost
container in a family orchard.
Managua (Nicaragua)
©FAO/Pilar Roman
©FAO/Pilar Roman
Figure 31 Vermicompost
container in a school orchard.
Tegucigalpa (Honduras)
58
Figure 34 Vermicompost
in family farming. Neiva
(Colombia)
©FAO/Pilar Roman
©FAO/Pilar Roman
Figure 33 Vermicompost
container in peri-urban
farming. Asunción (Paraguay)
Substrate: usually a mixture of soil with fresh organic material (vegetable waste, manure,
etc.) is used in a 3:1 ratio; or composted organic material with fresh material in a 2: 1
ratio respectively.
Broodstock: The most common recommendation is one kilogram broodstock per
square meter of bed. The broodstock can be purchased also be obtained from the beds.
Depending on the country, one kilogram of earthworm may cost between USD 50-100.

Table 17 Environmental conditions:
Parameter
Moisture
Temperature
pH
Light
Ideal Range
70%-80%, this is the maximum moisture, as the worm breathes
through the skin, and a higher moisture may prevent breathing.
20-30°C
5-8.5. Verify with a pH strip before feeding the earthworm.
The earthworm is photosensitive so, it will always prefer a dark
environment.

The following materials may be added to the vermicompost:
Manure, paper and unpainted cardboard, fruits and vegetables, eggshell, pruning, grass
clippings, straw, crop waste, coffee pulp, cereal grains. Biosolids from home waste water
treatment plants (Lotzof 2012) may also be applied.
Vermicompost harvest
The finished vermicompost is harvested depending on the production system and size.
The earthworm trapping system, which is used at a small scale, consists of stopping
feeding the earthworms for 8-10 days. Then, “fresh food” is placed at one end of the
bed or on the material in the same container to attract earthworms. Thus, the earthworm
moves towards fresh material looking for food and can be collected in that place.
In this work, the newly hatched earthworms and new cocoon are left in the
vermicompost, so they are not recovered. The vermicompost is more stable than
compost and contains more humic and fulvic acids (see Annex 7.4)
The material obtained can be sieved in order to homogenize the size or drying (Figure
35) to be stored and subsequently applied to soil. It is also used as a basis for the
production of vermicompost tea.

59
©M.M.Martinez
Figure 35 Vermicompost drying area in colombia 2008
Like compost, vermicompost improves soil structure, increases water retention,
provides the soil with beneficial microorganisms, in addition to other metabolites
and enzymes involved in the transformation of organic matter.

5.2 Compost tea
Compost tea is the water-soluble extract obtained from the compost. This is a
system to extract compost compounds that are soluble in water and additionally,
microorganisms. This system is similar to that used to make herbs tea or regular tea,
but with cold water which is clean but not necessarily potable.
The production of compost tea is intended to increase the microbial load of compost,
so additives can be incorporated to the process which act as catalysts to induce
microbial metabolism and thereby, increase populations more quickly and efficiently
(Scheuerell, 2004 ; Angulo et al, 2011)..
Compost tea should be differentiated from other products such as compost leachate,
manure tea and compost extract:
60
1. Compost leaching: corresponds to water that drains due to over-saturation
(excessive moisture) of the material during the composting process. This excess water,
leaks out of the compost and can be collected. It also contains soluble nutrients and
some microorganisms. However, when the compost is too wet and still immature,
anaerobic zones are developed where compounds such as sugars produce acids
and other compounds that may be toxic to plants (phytotoxic). When the leachate
comes from fresh compost, the liquid is usually dark, acid pH and unpleasant odour
(Figure 36).

©M.M.Martinez
Figure 36 Fresh compost leachate.
Vegetable compost, funza, colombia
2. Compost extract: is the product of passing water through the compost. This water
also contains soluble nutrients and microorganisms, but due to the contact time of
water with the material, the recovery is lower. Some producers recycle this liquid on the
compost piles and may recover microorganisms, but this labour is expensive and the
recovery not significant.
3. Manure tea: is the aqueous extract of manure. It contains soluble elements
according to its maturity. It is a nitrogen source, either as nitrates (mature) or ammonium
(fresh). It also contains soluble phosphorus and potassium, high number of bacteria,
and since it has not gone through a maturation process, it may also contain other
unwanted elements such as antibiotics or drug residues. Microbiologically, it may
contain pathogens such as protozoal eggs and cysts as well as other phytopathogen
nematodes.

61
4. Obtaining compost tea
Compost tea is obtained from finished and mature compost, but there are those
who make tea from fresh or partially composted manure. It should be noted that the
quality and content of substances in the aqueous extract will depend on the quality
and composition of the raw material.
Once the compost is ready, the extraction is performed. The following is required:
• A plastic tank located in a cool and clean area, protected from direct sunlight
and rain. Ambient temperature.
• A mesh, bag or porous container for compost.
• A motor and an adapted piping inside the tank to maintain aeration.
• Clean water, preferable potable water.
Figure 37 Tank to obtain compost tea
Compost tea
Bag
Sludge
At commercial level, there are tanks designed with special devices to ease permanent
and homogenous aeration.

62
Preparation:
•
The compost is placed into the mesh or porous bag in a ratio equivalent to 10%
(weight/volume) the volume of the tank water approximately.

•
he mesh or bag is hanged on the edge of the tank ensuring that the solid material
is in contact with water. This is similar to a tea bag in a cup.

•
The motor is switched on and the continuous and mechanical aeration process
runs for about 24-36 hours. The motor can be programmed to work for two
hours and one hour off (2x1).

•
When the time is over, the mesh with damp compost is removed, and this material
can return to a compost pile in its initial phase.

•
The liquid turns caramel colour (lighter or darker depending on the source
material). If the source material is fresh manure the colour is green and
vermicompost or humus, the colour is dark brown.

•
It is necessary to verify that the process is carried out correctly. A simple verification
way is through odour, because unpleasant odour is produced when oxygen is
insufficient; an aerobic process should not produce offensive odours.

Application of compost tea
The compost tea can be applied to foliar level spraying the surface of the leaves or
directly to the soil together with irrigation water.o.
Compounds present in the compost tea
Compounds present in the compost tea include organic substances that have been
produced by microorganisms during the process, namely, organic acids, amino acids
and sugars, among others.
It also contains soluble inorganic elements such as N, P, K, among others, that
contribute to the nutrition of microorganisms and plants once applied to a farming
system (Annex 7.4).
Likewise, it contains high concentration and variety of beneficial microorganisms
such as bacteria, fungi and nematodes which, in agricultural systems, help preventing
disease, increase the availability of nutritional elements and stimulate plant growth.

63
Quality of the compost tea
The quality of the compost tea depends on the quality of compost or material,
where appropriate. If the compost is matured, there would be higher certainty that
pathogens, seeds, nematodes and other phytopathogens have been eliminated.
Conversely, if the composting process does not reach the required temperature
and time, or materials are raw, it is highly probable to find in both, the material or
“compost” and in tea, bacteria such as Salmonella spp., E. coli and Clostridium
spp. and viruses such as Enteroviruses, Hepatitis A and Adenovirus, as well as
parasites such as Taenia sp. and Ascaris lumbricoides, which can cause major
intestinal diseases (Ingram, 2009), causing health problems for both the farmer and
the consumer. So, safety precautions should be taken before application.

64
6. Experiences in
Latin America
©FAO/Pilar Roman
65
6. Experiences in latin
america
6.1 Compost production from pig breeding in
deep litter5
Location. Monte Heliconia Farm, located in Las Ceibas river watershed, Colombia. Land with
an average temperature of 25 °C and annual rainfall of 1,300 mm. The property is situated at an
altitude of 780 MASL, in an ecological system classified as Tropical Dry Forest.
Project background. Fattening pig in deep litter is a system that was introduced in 40 farms in
the area with very good results (Figure 38). The biggest advantage of this system is the considerable
saving of water since it does not require washing the pig pens that uses 2 m3 water, per pig a
month, approximately. Another important advantage of this system is the production of organic
fertilizer from aerobic composting of excreta, minimizing the potential for contamination.

©FAO/Pilar Roman
Figure 38 Pig fattening in deep litter,
monte heliconia farm
Process description. This example corresponds to the collection of organic waste (excreta and
bed) of 20 fattening pigs, housed in a pen 4∙10 m2 (area: 40 m2).
The productive cycle (growing and fattening) lasts five months, during which each animal produces
450 kg of excreta (faeces plus urine) on average. In the present study the total excreta collected at
the end of the cycle with 20 pigs was 9,000 kg and 1,200 kg of litter (rice husk), which made a total
of 10,200 kg of organic material collected, that goes to the next composting phase.
The deep litter is made up of the following:
5. FAO project experience: Watershed Management Plan of Las Ceibas river. UTF/COL/030/COL
66
Rice husk. This husk performs like drying agent, being this property that enhances its use as a deep
litter in pigs fattening, to dry excreta.
Pig manure and urine. The main element of the litter (88% of the total area).
The deep litter system implies the following tasks:
Litter preparation. The pig pen floor is compacted earth with perimeter drains to prevent entry
of water runoff. The litter should be 40 cm deep for good absorption and drying of organic material
(Figure 39). In the current example, 750 kg of rice husks were used for a 40 m2 pig pen.

©FAO/Pilar Roman
Figure 39 Preparing the litter with rice husk
By natural behaviour pigs are permanently rooting, turning the litter, allowing in this way a
rapid drying of excreta (Figure 40). It is here were composting begins with the rise in ambient
temperature of 15°C above the ambient temperature, up to 40°C. This increase in temperature
reduces offensive odours and disrupt the life cycle of the housefly.

©FAO/Pilar Roman
Figure 40 Pigs rooting the litter
67
Litter collection and transport. Once the fattening cycle (5 months) is over, the pigs are
taken out to be sold. The litter is immediately collected and moved (Figure 41) to a 100 m2
flat site, roofed and earthen floor. All the material, about 10 tons, is placed in a row of about
1 m height.

©FAO/Pilar Roman
Figure 41 Litter collection and building the compost pile
Composting management: After loading the material in the compost, the control of the
three most important variables in this aerobic composting process starts:
Aeration. The material of the row is turned manually with shovels (Figure 42). This procedure
is intended to improve the aerobic conditions of the substrate, as well as promote the
homogenization of the mixture and achieve a stabilization process. This procedure is performed
every two months, with a total of 3 turns in six months.

©FAO/Pilar Roman
Figure 42 Periodical turning of the
compost pile
68
In this case study, the composting process lasted six months, what was a decision of the
person responsible for this operation. Under other operating conditions such as many
more turnovers, the final product can be obtained in less time, apart from the fact that the
material from pig pens has already begun the process favoured by the animals’ rooting,
litter temperature and dehydration of excreta.
Moisture. Together with turnings, water is added in spray form (Figure 43), trying to
achieve approximately 65% moisture in the material, what is verified by the fist test.

©FAO/Pilar Roman
Figure 43 Watering the compost pile
Temperature. It should be monitored every week using a thermometer, recording
measurements at various points in the pile.
The final product obtained (Figure 44) should have a pleasant smell of earth, dark brown
and homogeneous texture of small grains 6.

6. There may be a high concentration of copper, since this element is present in pig slurry. Therefore,
we must regulate the addition of drying material.

69
©FAO/Pilar Roman
Figure 44 Packaging final product
Use. This organic material is used in fertilization of grasses, which are used as coverage in
bioengineering works to control erosion (Figure 45).

©FAO/Pilar Roman
Figure 45 Compost in bioengineering.
Colombia
Source: CDC J.A Saldivar. Paraguay
It has also been used in neighbouring farms as soil breeder for crops like cacao, citrus and
passion fruits which have visually offered good growth, development and leaves colour.

70
6.2 Compost pile in Peri-urban farming7
Location. CDC of municipalities of J. A. Saldivar and Nueva Italia, Asunción, Paraguay.
The local climate is subtropical with a dry winter (July), the annual rainfall is 1,400mm at
an altitude of 40 MASL.
Process description. First, clean and delimit an area of approximately 2m x 1m (Figure
47). A sheet of crossed branches is placed to favour pile drainage and aeration. A pole of
about 2.50 m in height is placed in the centre of the pile (see Chapter 4.3.2).

©FAO/Pilar Roman
Figure 46 Cleaning the pile area
Source: CDC J.A Saldivar. Paraguay
Then, layers of organic waste of about 15-20 cm are disposed, interspersing vegetable
waste and hen bedding. A thin layer of earth (2 cm) can be spread every four layers
as buffer for temperatures rise and also as inoculant of microorganisms. The process is
repeated until the pile reaches 1.5 metres in height. During stacking of the material, if
they are too dry, it is advisable to moisten the layers.
Perform moisture and temperature controls according to chapter 4.3.1. The composting
process lasts 12 weeks in summer and up to 24 weeks in winter. The final product has a
pleasant smell of earth and dark brown.
Use. This organic material is used to fertilize planks for the production of leafy vegetables
in the CDC, with an application of 3-5 kg/m2 to the soil.

7. FAO project experience: Strengthening family farming productive chains for a sustainable
social and economic integration in peri-urban areas of the Central Department of Paraguay. TCP/
PAR/3303
71
6.3 Compost piles that are not turned
Location. Ecologic Farm FEN, Curacaví. Chile. Zone with 15 ° C average temperature and
312 mm annual rainfall.
Process description. In order to facilitate the work to build the pile, it is advisable, if there is
available area, to pile materials separately (Figure 47). This makes it easy to arranging the pile
in layers of different materials.

Figure 47 Segregated material
to build the pile
©FAO/Pilar Roman
Green leaves
Chicken
manure
Thick branches
dry leaves
and grass
Dry manure
Fresh manure
The first step is to build an air cushion with thick branches (Chapter 4.3.2), 80 cm in height,
which is laid along the area where the pile will be built (Figure 48).

Figura 48 Thick branches forming
an air cushion
©FAO/Pilar Roman
Microsprinkler
72
80 cm
Then, the material is arranged in layers, interspersing layers of carbon-rich material
(leaves and branches) and nitrogen-rich material (manure and poultry litter). Figure 49
shows different layers of 10-15 cm thick. A hose with two micro-sprinklers may be is
placed on top of the pile, at 2.5 metres to keep moisture in the pile. The micro-sprinklers
are in operation during the formation of the pile.
Since this system does not require turning, it is necessary to add a ventilating stack to
improve aeration of the pile (see Chapter 4.3.2). A pole of about 2 m high and 2025 cm in diameter is inserted in the centre of the pile while the layers of materials are
placed. After the pile is built, the pole is removed (Figure 50 ).
The driest layers of material are placed in the first centimetres of the pile because water
irrigation is accumulated in that zone.

Figura 49 Interspersed layers of material
rich in carbon and nitrogen
Pole to facilitate ventilation
Manure layer
Green leaves layer
The air cushion is down
by the weight of the
materials
Manure layer
©FAO/Pilar Roman
Dry grass layer
Green leaves layer
Air cushion
73
When the pile reaches about 2 m height, is covered with a layer of straw to insulate from
the outside temperature (Figure 50).
Parameters are controlled every week and watering as required (Chapter 4.3.1). After 4-6
months the pile will be reduced to half its size and the material will be ready to be collected
and used as fertilizer.

Figure 50 Schematic of pile without turning
Source: P. Roman, FAO
74
6.4 Horizontal metal compost barrel in
Urban Farming 8
Location. CDC of Urban Farming in Los Laureles, Managua, Nicaragua. Managua is
one of the warmest capital of Central America with an average temperature of 27°C.
The annual rainfall is 1,100 mm and the city is located at an altitude of 35 MASL.
Process description. The Demonstration Centre uses a compost container built with
local materials, such as a 200 L metal barrel supported by a wooden structure and
wheels to facilitate turning (Figure 51). The compost barrel is placed in a shaded area.

©CDC-Nicaragua
Figure 51 Horizontal metal
compost barrel
The material used in composting come from the same training centre, as fruit and vegetable
scraps, dry or green leaves from crops. Fresh and dry manure comes from nearby centres
and the mixture is enriched with plant ashes (micronutrients). It is common to add molasses
as a source of energy (C) for microorganisms and whey as microorganisms’ inoculant.
The mix of materials has a density around 500 kg/m3, so a 0.2 m3 drum has a capacity
of 100 kg of this mixture.

8. FAO project experience: Implementation of Urban and Peri-urban Farming in the Municipality
of Ciudad Sandino and Los Laureles Sur borough. GCP/NIC/038/SPA
75
Table 18 Material to compost in barrel
Type of Material
kg
Fruit and vegetative food scraps
40
Green leaves
20
Dry leaves
5
Fresh Cow dung
20
Dry Cow dung
10
Ash
5
If molasses and whey are included in the process, 1 L of each product should be added
at the beginning of the process.
The materials of the table are mixed and put in the barrel and periodical controls of
temperature and moisture are performed (See Chapter 4.4.1). The process under local
conditions with the materials of Table 18 Material to compost, lasts 8 weeks; after that
time, the material enters into the maturation phase and is ready to be used.

76
6.5 Horizontal plastic compost drum in Family
Farming9
Location. Alcira Arzamendia Estate, in the Municipal district Nueva Italia, Asunción,
Paraguay. The local climate is subtropical with a dry winter (July), the annual rainfall is
1,400mm and the estate is at an altitude of 42 MASL.
Process description. The material used for composting comes from the same estate, as
fruit and vegetable scraps, green leaves of crops. Cattle dung manure, poultry litter and
plant ashes mixture was also used (as a source of micronutrients).

©FAO/Pilar Roman
Figure 52 Preparation of the compost
drum with material of local farmers
9. FAO project experience: Strengthening family farming productive chains for a sustainable
social and economic integration in peri-urban areas of the Central Department of Paraguay. TCP/
PAR/3303
77
The materials used in the compost container are: 1 plastic drum (Figure 52) of 200 L (0.2 m3)
with lid; 3 rods 1.50 m and ¾” (2 cm) in diameter to mix the materials.
The material of the compost container is:
Table 19 Material of the compost container
Type of Material
%
Grass clippings, dry leaves, fruit skin
70%
Dry cattle dung manure
20%
Poultry litter (hen bedding with rice husk)
10%
Urea
0.1%
The mix of materials has a density around 500 kg/m3, so a 0.2 m3 drum has a capacity of
100 kg of this mixture.
10 L of water are used to maintain the optimum moisture content of the mixture. The drum
is rolled daily (two turns) to facilitate the homogeneity of the mixture. After 8-10 weeks, the
material is brown colour, has a pleasant odour and is ready for use
78
6.6 Compost production from lettuce
industry waste
Location. Hortícola de Hoy, Funza, Cundinamarca, Colombia. Average Temperature
15°C. Average rainfall 600 mm/year
Process description. The farm has 2 hectares of intensive plant production (Figure 53).
Plant production is performed in greenhouse and open field and the main crop is lettuce
(Lactuca sativa). Before seeding, the soil is prepared by removing roots, leaves and
unharvested plants and then, adding organic matter (compost) and rice husks.

©Gutiérrez & Fernández
Figure 53 Fertilization of lettuce
with compost
Process description. The parent material for composting is lettuce waste (Figure 54), rice
husk and Kikuyu grass cutting (Pennisetum clandestinum) to build the pile in a 50:40:10
v/v ratio.
The soil was prepared tamping the soil and spreading a layer of sand-gravel-clay in a
30:20:50 ratio to isolate leachates. Because lettuce is 85% water with low content of
C and N, is important to compensate moisture through mixtures with dry materials that
provide not only C but also N.
In this particular case, the piles had a base of 2 x 3 m2, starting with a 5 cm layer of rice
husk, a mix of crop waste and weeding, covered with grass cutting. Then process was
repeated until the pile reached 1.50 m.

79
©M.M.Martínez
Figura 54 Fresh material to compost
The thermophilic phase starts the day 4 of the process, reaching 44°C in the first week and
remaining constant for three weeks. Every 4 days manual turns are performed. At week 4
the temperature decreases to ambient temperature. The maturation process lasts until week
8 and the compost is turned once a week. Temperatures recorded during the process are
shown in Figure 55.

Temperature ªC
Figure 55 Temperatures recorded during the process
Time (weeks)
Source: Barrera, Charry y Martinez, 2008
The compost obtained after 8 weeks, is loose like soil, and with a pleasant damp earth
odour. Particle of husks were covered with decomposed organic matter.

80
7. Annex
©FAO/Pilar Roman
81
7. Annex
7.1 Conversion factors
Distance
1 metre = 1.09 yards = 3.28 feet = 39.37 inches
1 yard = 3 feet = 0.91 metres
1 foot = 12 inches = 0.3 metres
Area
1 hectare = 10.000 square metres = 2.47 acres
1 acre = 4.48 square yards = 0.4 hectares
Weight
1 kilogram = 1,000 grams = 2.2 pounds
1 metric tonne = 2,204 pounds
1 pound = 0.45 kilograms
1 kg/ha = 0.89 pound/acre
1 pound/acre = 1.12 kg/ha
7.2 Field analysis of the need of fertilizers
If plants fail to absorb sufficient quantities of a particular nutrient, the symptom of deficiency appears
on the appearance of the plant; thus, it is possible to determine the need of a particular nutrient. Clear
symptoms will only express in cases of extreme deficiency.

Table 20 Symptoms of plant deficiency
Nutrient
82
Sign of deficiency in the plant
Nitrogen
Stunted growth plants, yellowing of the leaves from the tip (chlorosis). The lower leaves may
die prematurely while the top of the plant remains green.

Potassium
Reduced growth, dwarfism. Dark outer edges of the leaves (edge necrosis); withered leaves.
Small fruits. Lodging.

Phosphorus
Stunted growth. Dark blue and purple leaves from the tip. The fruits appear deformed and
empty grains.

7.3 Analysis of compost safety
Microbiological analyses are an important aspect in determining the sanitary quality
of compost through indicators and pathogens.
Thermotolerant Coliforms (also known as faecal coliforms)
Thermotolerant coliforms are a class of Gram negative bacteria that belong to
the enterobacter which can ferment lactose to produce indole 44.5°C. According
to EPA10 the presence of this group in a high number is a possible indicator of
the presence of pathogenic bacteria such as Salmonella, Shigella and E. coli
verotoxigenic. Their presence in high concentrations in compost or organic material
indicates that the thermal process has been insufficient or deficient; i.e., compost did
not reach the appropriate temperatures or were reached but for short periods of time
or a subsequent water contamination occurred during the cooling stages. It has been
established that counts below 1,000ufc per dry weight gram of compost means that
enteric pathogens are destroyed.
Bacterial pathogen
Bacterial pathogen for humans and animals can be found in raw materials like manure,
being the presence of Salmonella spp. of particular interest. This microorganism is
one of the main agents of Foodborne Diseases and may be a usual inhabitant of the
digestive tract of animals including poultry (chicken being an important reservoir),
cattle, and pigs, among others. (Carrascal 2011).
Also of interest is E. coli O157: H7, which has been associated to diseases caused
by the intake of fruits, raw vegetables and unpasteurized products (Islam 2005). It
can be found in animals such as cattle, deer and sheep, and can survive up to 70
days in manure, depending on concentration and temperature. Other pathogens
found in compost that could reach men though the intake of contaminated foods
include: Clostridium perfringens, Listeria monocytogenes, Bacillus cereus and
Cryptosporidium parvum (Beuchat 2006).

10. Environmental Protection Agency of United States
83
Table 21 Microbiological limits according to different standards
Microorganism
Tolerance limit
Chile
NCh 2880/04
A
Fecal coliform
(dry base)
Mexico
EU
Colombia
European Union
5167/04
NTEA-006-SMARS-2006.

<1000 ufc/g Total
enterobacterial
<1000 NMP/g
B
<1000
<2000
NMP/g
NMP/g
< 1 x 103 NMP/g
Salmonella spp
Absent in
25g of
product
Absent in
25g of
product
Absent in 25g of
product
Absent in 25g of
product
<3 /g en bs
Enteroococcus
faecalis
-
-
1000 NMP/g
ND
-
Absent in
1g
Up to 1 in
1g
Absent in 1 g
ND
<10 /g bs
Viable helminth eggs
/ Ascaris
NMP= Most probable number, ufc= colony formation units, bs= dry base
Heavy metals
Heavy metals are a group of chemicals that become undesirable because they do not decompose
(only change its oxidation state). They have negative effects on human health and impact on food
chain at ground and water level. Although found in nature, when the concentration exceeds
defined limits, there may be problems of accumulation in plant tissues (fruit, root) or vital organs
(liver, brain, fat tissue) with usually long term effects (chronic) .
Heavy metals, together with the presence of pathogens, are considered to determine the quality
of compost. The limits vary between countries, although EPA and the European Union (EU)
regulations are taken as example.

84
7.4 Vermicompost
Tabla 22 Chemical properties of
vermicompost
Fulvic acid
14 - 30%
Humic acids
2,8 - 5,8%
Sodium
0,02%
Copper
0,05%
Iron
0,02%
Manganese
0,006%
C:N ratio
10 - 11%
7.5 Benefits of compost Tea
1. Plant Health. Since compost tea contains nutrients and microorganisms that have
multiplied in preparation tanks, it may contain biological agents for disease control.
Microorganisms such as Trichoderma, Pseudomonas, or Pantoea spp., are present in
compost and are capable of growing in the compost tea and perform disease suppression
processes. This suppression is associated with substances that occur during compost
maturation and depend on biological and physicochemical characteristics (Temorshuizen
et al., 2006).
2. Biological fixation of nitrogen and biofertilization. As in compost, compost
tea may contain (usually to a lesser extent) bacteria associated with crops fertilization.
They are nitrogen-fixing bacteria (Azotobacter sp., and Rhizobium sp., Klebsiella sp.) and
phosphates solubilisation agents (Dubeikovsky et al., 1993)
3. Improvement of soil carbon content. As it is the soluble extract of the compost,
compost tea also contains water soluble carbohydrate. This carbon positively affects
native soil populations, being energy source for microorganisms in the plant’s root
zone (rhizosphere) or leaves (phyllosphere). This soluble carbon may also be used by
microorganisms to build microaggregates, thus improving water retention capacity and
structure of the soil(Ha et al., 2008)
4. Increasing the number of microorganisms. Compost tea uses different products
to help with microorganisms’ multiplication during the preparation time. These products
called catalysts, favour the movement of microorganisms from the compost into the water
and also serve as a source of nutrients. Sugar, molasses, fish emulsion and phosphate rock
are used as effective substrates in this catalytic process (Ingham, 2005, Shrestha et al.,
2011).
85
86
8. Bibliographic
References
©FAO/Pilar Roman
87
8. Bibliographic References
Angulo, J., Alfonso, A., Martinez, M. & Garcia, A. 2011. Estimación de la transferencia
de E.coli desde compost a té de compost durante el proceso de elaboración. Agronomic
Congress in Chile. Antofagasta, Chile.
Antonio, G.F., Carlos, C.R., Reiner, R.R., Miguel, A.A., Angela, O., Cruz, M.J.G. &
Dendooven, L. 2008. Formulation of a liquid fertiliser for sorghum (Sorghum bicolour (L.)
Moench) using vermicompost leachate. Bioresource Technology. 99: 6174–6180.
Avery, L.M., Booth, P., Campbell, C., Tompkins D. & Hough R. 2012. Prevalence and
survival of potential pathogens in source-segregated green waste compost. Science of The
Total Environment. 431(0): 128-38.
Bengtsson G., Bengtsson, P. & Mansson K. 2003 “Gross nitrogen mineralization and
nitrification rates as a function of soil C:N ratio and microbial activity”. Soil Biology and
Biochemistry. 35 (1): 143-154.
Bernal, M., Alburquerque, J. & Moral, R. 2009. Composting of animal manures and
chemical criteria for compost maturity assessment. A review. Bioresource Technology.
100(22): 5444-53.
Beucha, L. 2006. Vectors and conditions for preharvest contamination of fruits and
vegetables with pathogens capable of causing enteric diseases. British Food Journal. 138:
38-53.
Cárdenas, B., Revah, S. & Gutierrez, V., Hernández, S. 2003. Tratamiento biológico de
compuestos orgánicos volátiles de fuentes fijas. Instituto Nacional de Ecología, INESEMARNAT, México.
Carrascal A. K., Castañeda R. & Pulido A. 2011. Perfil de riesgo Salmonella spp en pollo
entero y en piezas. Instituto Nacional de Salud. Colombia.
Cheng, Y., Chefetz, B., Heemest, J., Romaine, P. & Hatcher, P. 2000. Chemical nature
and composition of compost during mushrooms growth. Compost Science and Utilization.
8(4): 347.
Cornell University. Ration C:N calculator. (also available at “C:N Ratio” http://compost.
css.cornell.edu/calc/cn_ratio.html )
Dubeikovsky, A.N., Mordukhova, E.A., Kochetkov, V.V., Polikarpova, F.Y. & Boronin,
A.M., 1993. Growth promotion of blackcurrant softwood cuttings by recombinant strain
Pseudomonas fluorescens BSP53a synthesizing an increased amount of indole-3-acetic
acid. Soil Biol. Biochem. 25: 1277–1281.

88
Dukare, A.S., Prasanna,R., Dubey, S.C., Nain, L., Chaudhary, V., Singh, R. & Saxena, A.K.
2011. Evaluating novel microbe amended composts as biocontrol agents in tomato. Crop
Protection 30: 436-442
Enviromental Protection Agency, EPA. 1998. An analysis of composting as an environmental
remediation technology. EPA530-R-98-008. USA. P.15.
FAO. 2002. Los fertilizantes y su uso (also available at ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/006/
x4781s/x4781s00.pdf )
FAO 2003. On-farm Composting Methods. Land and Water Discussion paper No. 2.
Rome. (also available at http://www.fao.org/docrep/007/y5104e/y5104e00.HTM )
FAO. 2005. The importance of soil organic matter, key to drought-resistance soil and
sustained food production. FAO Soils Bulletin No. 80. Rome.
FAO. 2011. El Estado de los Recursos de Tierras y Aguas del Mundo para la Alimentación
y la Agricultura – Cómo gestionar los sistemas en peligro. Rome. (also available at http://
www.fao.org/docrep/015/i1688s/i1688s00.pdf )
FAO. 2012. FAO-Adapt. Programa marco de la FAO sobre adaptación al Cambio
Climático. Rome.
FAO. 2000. Inocuidad y calidad de los alimentos en relación con la agricultura orgánica.
XXII Conferencia Regional de la FAO para Europa, Oporto, Portugal.
Ferruzzi, C. 1987. Manual de Lombricultura. Ediciones Mundi-Prensa, Madrid.
Estado de Mexico. 2006. NTEA-006-SMA-RS-2006. Que establece los requisitos para
la producción de los mejoradores de suelos elaborados a partir de residuos orgánicos.
Gazeta Oficial.
Golakoti, T., Yoshida, W.Y., Chaganty, S. & Moore, R.E., 2000. Isolation and structures of
nostopeptolides A1, A2 and A3 from the cyanobacterium Nostoc sp. GSV224. Tetrahedron
56: 9093-9102.
Gong, C. 2007. Microbial safety control of compost material with cow dung by heat
treatment. Journal of Environmental Sciences. 19(8):1014-9.
HA, K.V., Marschner, P. & Bunemann, E.K., 2008. Dynamics of C, N, P and microbial
community composition in particulate soil organic matter during residue decomposition.
Plant Soil 303: 253–264.
Ingram, D. 2009. Assessment of foodborne pathogen survival during production and preharvest application of compost and compost tea. Dissertation submitted to the Faculty of
the Graduate School of the University of Maryland, College Park. 200 p.

89
Islam, M,, Doyle, M.P., Phatak, S.C., Millner, P. & Jiang, X. 2005. Survival of Escherichia
coli O157:H7 in soil and on carrots and onions grown in fields treated with contaminated
manure composts or irrigation water. Food Microbiology. 22(1): 63-70.
Jacob, A., Uexkull, H. 1961. Fertilización. Nutrición y abonado de los cultivos tropicales y
subtropicales. Internationales Handelmaatschappij voor Meststoffen, Amesterdam.
Kenney, S.J., Anderson, G.L., Williams, P.L., Millner, P.D., Beuchat, L.R. 2006. Migration
of Caenorhabditis elegans to manure and manure compost and potential for transport of
Salmonella newport to fruits and vegetables. International Journal of Food Microbiology.
106(1):61-8.
Kone, S. Dionne, A. Tweddell, R. Antoun, H. Avis, T. 2009. Suppressive effect of nonaerated compost teas on foliar fungal pathongens of tomatoe. Biological Control. 52:
167–173.
Lasaridi, K., Protopapa, I., Kotsou, M., Pilidis, G., Manios, T. & Kyriacou, A.. 2006.
Quality assessment of composts in the Greek market: The need for standards and quality
assurance. Journal of Environmental Management. 80(1): 58-65.
Lazcano C.,Gómez-Brandón M. & Dompinguez J. 2008. Comparison of the effectiveness
of composting and vermicomposting for the biological stabilization of cattle manure.
Chemosphere. 72: 1013-1019
Lindquist, S. & Craig, E.A. 1998. The heat shock proteins. Annu Rev Genet. 22: 631 – 77.
Lotzof, M. 2012. Very Large scale vermiculture in sludge stabilization. Vermitech Pty
Limited. Australia.
Magdoff, F. & Weil, R. 2004. Soil Organic Matter in Sustainable Agriculture. CRC Press
LLC. Boca Raton. p. 59-84.
Novo, R. 1983. La Vida Microbiana en el suelo. Escuela Superior de Ciencias Agrarias.
La Habana, Cuba.
Okur, N., 2002. Response of soil biological and biochemical activity to salination. The
Journal of Agricultural Faculty of Ege University. 39: 87–93.
Oliveira, M., Usall, J., Viñas, I., Solsona, C. & Abadias M. 2011. Transfer of Listeria innocua
from contaminated compost and irrigation water to lettuce leaves. Food Microbiology.
28(3): 590-6.
Ortega, R., 2011. Manejo Integrado de la nutrición en cultivos, importancia de la materia
organica. Proceedings: II International Symposium, Organic Matter and Climate Change.
Universidad Federico Santa Maria. Santiago, Chile.

90
Pavlou, G.C., Ehaliotis, C.D. & Kavvadias, V.A. 2007. Effect of organic and inorganic
fertilizers applied during successive crop seasons on growth and nitrate accumulation in
lettuce. Scientia Horticulturae. 111(4): 319-25.
Pensylvania State University, 1994. Agricultural Alternatives: Earthworm Production.
College of Agricultural Sciences, Cooperative Extension. PennState. 1-4.
PNUD-INIFAT. 2002. Manual para la producción de abonos orgánicos en la agricultura
urbana.
Porta, J., López, M. & Roquero de la Laburu, C. Edafología para la agricultura y el medio
ambiente. Mundiprensa. 1194:125.
Reineke S. & Reineke A. 2007. The impact of organophosphate pesticides in orchards on
earthworms in the Western Cape, South Africa. Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety.
66(2): 244-251.
Rodríguez R. Casos de éxito en la biorremediación de sitios contaminados. En Alternativas
Tecnológicas para el Tratamiento del Suelo. CIDITEC- CONACYT, México. P.34-47
Rosal, P. Perez, M. Arcos, M. Dios.“La Incidencia de Metales Pesados en Compost de
Residuos Sólidos Urbanos y en su uso Agronómico en España” Información Tecnológica
– Vol. 18 Nº 6, 75–82 (2007)
Sauri M. y Castillo E. 2002 Utilización de la composta en procesos para la remoción de
contaminantes. Ingeniería 6-3: 55-60
Scheuerell, S. 2004. Compost tea production practices, microbial properties, and plant
disease suppression. International Conference SOIL AND COMPOST ECO-BIOLOGY.
Pp 41-51.
Schuldt M. 2006. Peso o número de ejemplares, siembras de baja densidad y manejo.
Argentina. (also available at www.manualdelombricultura.com )
Schuldt M., Chistiansen R., Scatturice L.A. & Mayo J.P. 2007. Lombricultura. Desarrollo y
adaptacion a diferentes condiciones de temperie. RedVet. VIII(8): 1-10.
Schuldt M., Guarrera L. & Freyre L. 1987. Expansion de una población de Eisenia foetida
en el ámbito bonaerense. Una experiencia piloto. Rev. Asoc. Arg. Prod. Animal. 17(1):4956.
Semple K., Reid B. & Fermor T. 2001. Impact of composting strategies on the treatment
of soil contaminated with organic pollutants. Environmental Pollution. Elsevier. 112: 269283
91
Shrestha, K., Shrestha, P., Walsh, K.B, Harrower, K.M & Midmore, D.J. 2011.
Microbial enhancement of compost extracts based on cattle rumen content. compost –
Characterization of a system. Bioresource Technology. 102: 8027–8034.
Sori, S., Mahieu, N., Arah, J., Powlson, D., Madari, B. & Gaunt, J. A. 2001. Procedure
for Isolating Soil Organic Matter Fractions Suitable for Modeling. Soil Science Society of
American Journal. 65: 1121-8.
World Bank. Agricultural Production Statistics. (also available at http://data.worldbank.
org/data-catalog/commodity-price-data, http://data.worldbank.org/topic/agricultureand-rural-development )
92
Notes
93
94
95
96
3
View publication stats
